Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                   EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

          Proposal Part B: technical description

       SUSTAINABLE, RELIABLE AND EFFICIENT FLOATING PV POWER PLANTS (SURE)

[This document is tagged. Do not delete the tags; they are needed for processing.] #@APP-FORM-HERIAIA@#

No. *  Participant organization name                                               Short name            Country
1      Institute For Energy Technology                                             IFE                   Norway
2      Ciel et Terre International                                                 CTI                   France
3      Laketricity                                                                 LKY                   France
4      ZIMMERMANN PV-Stahlbau GmbH & Co. KG                                        ZIM                   Germany
5      BayWa r.e. Solar Projects GmbH                                              BayWa                 Germany
6      Sunlit Sea AS                                                               Sunlit                Norway
7      UAB Metsolar                                                                Metsolar              Lithuania
8      Nederlandse organisatie voor toegepast natuurvwetenschappelijk              TNO                   Netherlands
       onderzoek TNO
9      Fraunhofer Gesellschaft zur Forderung der Angewandten Forschung EV          Fraunhofer            Germany
10     Foundation Deltares                                                         Deltares              Netherlands
11     Association Compaz                                                          Compßz                Switzerland
12     SABIC Global Technologies BV                                                SABIC                 Netherlands

List of abbreviations

Abbreviation Definition                                     Abbreviation           Definition
                                                            IV                     Current-Voltage
aIRT   Aerial Infrared Thermography                         KER                    Key Exploitable Results
                                                            LCA                    Life Cycle Analysis
BoS    Balance of Systems                                   LCOE                   Levelized Cost of Electricity
                                                            O&M                    Operation and Maintenance
CAPEX  Capital Expenditures                                 OPEX                   Operational expenditures
                                                            PID                    Potential-Induced Degradation
CFD    Computational Fluid Dynamics
                                                            PLR                    Performance Loss Rates
D#     Deliverable Number                                   PP                     Polypropylene
                                                            PR                     Performance Ratio
EIA    Environmental Impact Assessment                      (m)RBI                 (maximum) Ratio of Blocked
                                                                                   Irradiation
ESIA   Environmental and Social Impact                      RE                     Renewable Energy
                                                            SBoS                   Structural Balance of Systems
       Assessment                                           SDG                    Sustainable Development Goal
                                                            SO                     Specific Objective
EYA    Energy Yield Assessment                              SSC                    Sea State Code
                                                            WIML                   Wave-Induced Mismatch Losses
FEM    Finite-Element Modelling                             WMO                    World Meteorological Organization

FP     Funded Project

FPV    Floating Photovoltaics

FTE    Full-time Employees
GLM    General Lake Model
GMB    Group Model Building
GPV    Ground-Mounted Photovoltaics
HDPE   High-Density Polyethylene
HLO    High Level Objective
IEA    International Energy Agency
IEC    International Electrotechnical
       Commission

Table of Contents              Page 2                         2.2 Measures to maximize impact            Page 24
 1. Excellence                 Page 3                         2.3 Impact Summary                         Page 30
                               Page 8                       3. Quality & Efficiency                      Page 32
   1.1 Objectives & Ambition   Page 18                        3.1 Work plan & Resources                  Page 32
   1.2 Methodology             Page 18                        3.2 Capacity of Participants               Page 44
 2 Impact
   2.1 Pathways to impact

                                                            Part B - Page 1 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                   EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

1  Excellence

Scaling up renewable energy (RE): rapidly and sustainably. Solar photovoltaic (PV) technology is widely
recognized as key to realizing fully decarbonized energy generation and a main lever to achieve the European Green
Deal objectives while phasing out our dependence on Russian fossil fuels. PV module installation rates have
increased tremendously over the last ten years, driven by reduced costs of PV and increased climate awareness. We
need to keep increasing the deployment rate for many years to come if we are to meet EU policy goals1. With
increasing PV deployment, issues related to land access will become increasingly important. Integrating PV in
architecture, infrastructure and agriculture are promising solutions to abate land scarcity. Floating PV (FPV) is
another2.

                                                                                    Through SuRE we will enhance the
                                                                                    affordability and sustainability of FPV.
                                                                                    Enhanced Sustainability will be achieved by
                                                                                    reducing the carbon footprints and enhance
                                                                                    positive synergies with the local environment.
                                                                                    The inherent modularity of PV provides an
                                                                                    opportunity to tailor coverage ratios, light
                                                                                    penetration, and layout to achieve FPV power
                                                                                    plants with a positive impact on the local
                                                                                    environment and biodiversity. We will
                                                                                    achieve enhanced affordability by making
                                                                                    more Reliable and cost-Efficient FPV power
                                                                                    plants, developing models and framework that
                                                                                    reduce the financial and reliability-related
                                                                                    risks of this still young technology. Finally,
                                                                                    we use existing and new knowledge to
significantly improve the designs of three specific FPV technologies. These include the two most widely used FPV
technologies in Europe: Ciel et Terre (CTI) and Zimmermann (ZIM). The third innovative FPV technology, Sunlit
Sea (Sunlit), aims at offshore applications. All three technologies have separate and concrete routes laid out in SuRE
to reduce LCOE through enhanced reliability and cost-efficiency, while reducing carbon footprints and enabling a
positive impact on the local biodiversity. The activities to reach these goals are structured by entwining 3
generalizable work packages (WPs), WP1 Sustainability, WP2 Reliability, and WP3 Efficiency, with 3 value-chain
specific WPs focused on innovations for the 3 FPV technologies, WP4 CTI, WP5 ZIM, and WP6 Sunlit, as illustrated
in Fig. 1. This approach benefits both a broad European FPV industry and the individual FPV value chains in SuRE.
Consequently, SuRE provides a clear pathway to substantially increase the deployment of FPV in Europe and expand
the application of FPV on inland and offshore waters, in line with the EU strategic priorities in Table 1.1.

Table 1.1: Relation of SuRE to EU strategic priorities.     Contribution of SuRE

    EU Strategic topic

   EU Climate strategies    The EU requires decoupling of growth and CO2 emissions. The transition to a climate
   and targets. 2050 long-  neutral society is both an urgent challenge and opportunity to build a better future for
                            all. This is at the heart of the European Green Deal. SuRE, with our commitments to
         term strategy      accelerating economical and sustainable RE supports these aims.

    The European            The European Strategic Energy Technology Plan (SET Plan) aims to boost the transition
   Strategic Energy         towards a climate neutral energy system through the development of low-carbon
   Technology Plan          technologies in a fast and cost-competitive way. The objectives of SuRE are perfectly
                            aligned with the two first SET plan key actions ("N░1 in renewables").

   REPower EU               The EU has published the plan REPower EU to rapidly reduce dependence on Russian
                            fossil fuels and fast forward the green transition. As part of the REPower EU plan, the
                            European Commission aims to bring online over 320 GW of PV by 2025 and almost 600
                            GW by 2030. SuRE can accelerate FPV rollout şresponsiblyş to be an important wedge
                            of the PV pie to provide "a truly interconnected and resilient EU energy network."

   The EU Solar Energy      Amid the energy crisis and geopolitical tensions, the implementation of the Strategy and
   Strategy from the EU     key solar initiatives proposed for the EU and its member states is of utmost urgency, as
                            reflected in this document approved by the EU Commission in May 2022. SuRE
        Commission          addresses the caution that "required expansion in utility-scale projects will increasingly

                                                            Part B - Page 2 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                   EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

The Paris Agreement   face competing uses of land and public acceptance challenges" by making FPV, a non-
                      land based RE more cost competitive and sustainable.
    The European
 Industrial Strategy  To keep mean global temperatures well below 2 ░C above pre-industrial levels,
                      decarbonization must accelerate. SuRE aims to contribute to this, while increasing
                      society's ability to foster climate resilience by, for example, pairing PV production with
                      water-reservoir stewardship and avoiding competition with food production lands.

                      The Strategy seeks to strengthen the single market, continue openness to trade, and
                      accelerate the green and digital transitions. SuRE encompasses several FPV suppliers,
                      who are headquartered in Europe, deploy utility-scale FPV in Europe, source material
                      and labour from Europe, and strengthen the EU's open strategic autonomy.

1.1 Objectives and ambition #@PRJ-OBJ-PO@#
1.1.1 Objectives and relation to the work programme

SuRE provides targeted answers and measurable solutions to the topic HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03: Floating
PV Systems, addressing systematically the five objectives of the Scope. The consortium has set a robust
implementation plan to ensure the success of SuRE and de-risk the project.

The overall SuRE objective is to increase competitiveness of FPV power plants compared to fossil fuels
   and land-consuming renewable technologies by enabling sustainable design, reducing LCOE and
            expanding the application potential for three leading European FPV technologies.

This objective of SuRE is based on long-term development plans of the three FPV technology providers in the

consortium: 1) Ciel et Terre (CTI, France) was early to provide utility-scale FPV solutions. Since 2011, they have

installed 650 MW globally, with 1.2 GW under development. Their subsidiary Laketricity (LKY, France), devoted

to utility-scale FPV projects development, has delivered 90 projects in 10 countries. CTI and LKY will build a 5 MW

FPV pilot plant situated on Lac de Tertre, Saint Ghislain in Belgium, using CTIs recently prototyped floater design.

This new design is a radical departure from their existing Hydrelio technology. It provides reduced costs, increased

sustainability, and expanded waterbodies for installation. 2) Zimmermann PV-Steel Group (ZIM, Germany) and

their long-term developer partner, BayWa r.e., (BayWa, Germany) have installed 210 MW of FPV, including the

Sellingen project in the Netherlands which is the largest FPV system outside of Asia. ZIM and BayWa will build a 5

MW FPV pilot in the Netherlands, to extend their FPV design for more waterbodies while advancing on all SuRE

fronts. BayWa has a pipeline of more than 2 GW of FPV projects. 3) Sunlit Sea (Sunlit, Norway) has developed a

floater-module integrated FPV system. They have several pilot projects in Norwegian and US waters. Metsolar

(Lithuania) makes custom PV modules and has worked with Sunlit for years. Sunlit will update their design to

decrease resource burden and production cost by using SuRE to bring new technologies into their production line.

During the project, SuRE will build a 105 kW pilot at Singl°ya, Norway. Augmenting these 3 independent FPV value

chains, SuRE includes SABIC (Netherlands) as a technical innovator of bio- and circular plastics for the FPV market.

SABIC will work across the value chains and with the four independent research institutes to deliver plastic

sustainably. Four research institutes and one science communication association complete the SuRE consortium: IFE

(Norway) coordinates SuRE, Fraunhofer (Germany) is the largest solar research institute in Europe, TNO

(Netherlands) is an independent research association for targeted innovation, Deltares (Netherlands) is an

independent knowledge institute in water and                There is no clear classification of FPV technologies for
subsurface. All four institutes have been forerunners
of driving FPV science and technology. Compßz               application on inland and/or offshore waters. To specify
(Switzerland) is a collective of visionary scientists
and artists who push social progress in Europe.             wave conditions the FPV technologies are designed for, we
Together the SuRE consortium is exceptionally well
positioned to impact the future of FPV technology           use the Sea State Codes (SSC) of the World Meteorological
and enable a more rapid deployment. SuRE will
expand the application areas, minimize                      Orga za 's (WMO) Th s a s a s r m av h gh
environmental impact, and decrease LCOE to make
FPV a robust source of RE.                                  0 m (SSC 0) to wave height > 14 m (SSC 9). The term

                                                            "inland" FPV b s d r d ym  FPV

                                                            freshwater b d s, h h rm "offshore" FPV b

                                                            used for deployment of FPV at sea. The design-SSC must

                                                            be evaluated for the individual location/water body.

To achieve our overall objective, we have defined the High-Level Objectives (HLO) and Specific Objectives (SO)
in Table 1.2. Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) describe how SOs will be measured and verified.

                                                            Part B - Page 3 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                   EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

Table 1.2: High-Level call Objectives and corresponding Specific Objectives in SuRE.

 HLO1. Reduce LCOE for FPV technologies and verify technology on adequate scale (minimum 5 MW)
 SO1:Improve design and reduce material consumption to decrease CAPEX for three European FPV technologies
 How SuRE achieves it: 1.1a) Develop a new FPV technology patented by CTI, including a 5 MW pilot. The 5 MW
 pilot, finished in M18 of SuRE, will be used as a basis for further testing and improvements to the technology. The
 core of the development is a shift in O&M strategy that will reduce the Balance of System (BoS) cost. BoS costs is
 the main factor that drives LCOE for FPV to be higher than for Ground-mounted PV (GPV) 1.1b) Reduce BoS costs
 for ZIM FPV technology through new schemes for interconnects and mooring, and more accurate models for the
 forces on the structure to avoid overengineering of the steel components. Developments will be verified in a 5 MW
 pilot, starting construction in M18. 1.1c) Develop a tool for multi-dimensional optimization of Sunlit's patented
 floating structure, with respect to cost, efficiency, and structural robustness. 1.1d) Collaboration among the strong
 value chains represented in SuRE will contribute to transferability across sites, water body types, and manufacturers.
 KPIs: CTI targets an LCOE reduction of 10% compared to their Hydrelio technology. ZIM targets a 15% reduction
 in Structural BoS. Sunlit has calculated a potential LCOE reduction of up to 60%, due to high potential for reductions
 in CAPEX. The exact reduction depends mainly on the optimization of the aluminum pressing. WPs: 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
 SO2: Improved FPV designs and O&M tools to decrease OPEX for all FPV technologies
 How SuRE achieves it: 1.2a) CTI is developing a new technology design which will allow lowering of O&M cost.
 An associated new O&M method will be developed in the project 1.2.b) IFE will develop algorithm for endogenous
 determination of optimal cleaning intervals. 1.2c) The algorithm for optimal cleaning intervals will be tested on
 existing power plants from the different consortium participants 1.2d) Existing O&M routines will be adapted to be
 applicable at higher SSC. 1.2d) Fraunhofer and IFE will develop a digital twin for the CTI technology to enable
 more efficient fault detection and maintenance routines. 1.2.e) Collaborative R&D among commercial partners and
 research institutes in SuRE will contribute to establish and publish pre-normative practices. KPIs: New CTI O&M
 strategy implemented on pilot. Best practice O&M for FPV published in International Energy Agency (IEA)
 Photovoltaic Power Systems Programme (PVPS) report. Algorithm for Optimal Cleaning Intervals for FPV
 published. Open access publication of algorithm for cleaning optimization for FPV. WPs: 3, 4, 5, 6
 SO3: Develop tools to improve yield for all FPV technologies and apply the tools for concrete optimization of the
 3 FPV technologies in SuRE
 How SuRE achieves it: 1.3a) IFE and Fraunhofer will develop and verify a model for calculating the operating
 temperature of PV modules in FPV applications that accounts for all the different cooling mechanisms (evaporative,
 conductive, convective, and radiative). 1.3b) The complete thermal model will be used together with the FPV
 technology providers to optimize the designs with respect to cooling. 1.3c) TNO and IFE will develop a new model
 for wave induced mismatch losses (WIML). KPIs: A significant reduction of thermal losses of ~3% for CTIs new
 technology compared to Hydrelio. A reduction in thermal losses for Sunlit technology of ~3% (6 degrees reduction
 in operating temperature). Quantified and verified U-values for the 3 FPV technologies. Open access publication on
 thermal model for FPV power plants. Guidelines for predictive yield modelling of FPV in PVsyst WPs: 3, 4, 5, 6.
 HLO2. Ensure reliable operation and extend the application of low-cost FPV technologies to offshore conditions
 SO4: Demonstrate system components that satisfy structural and functional requirements for the entire lifecycle.
 How SuRE achieves it: 2.1a) Expand ZIM Float design standards from Sea State Code 3 (SSC 3) WMO - Slight,
 wave height 0.5 ş 1.25 m) to SSC 4 (Moderate, wave height 1.25 - 2.5 m) through optimization and increased
 structural integrity of their steel components, and development of new mooring solutions. 2.1b) Perform
 environmental stress fatigue crack testing of floater interconnects 2.1c) Test and verify steel coatings applicable in
 higher salinity water. 2.1d) Validate Sunlit design up to SSC 5 (Rough, 2.5 ş 4 m) with respect to structural integrity
 and moisture ingress 2.1e) Develop and verify plastics components with satisfactory UV stability. 2.1e) Analysis of
 reliability challenges resulting from soiling and fouling and potential mitigation measures at module level. 2.1f)
 Analyze expected increased loads on mooring and floating structures due to algae growth. 2.1g) Analyze
 performance loss rates (PLR) from new pilots and existing systems. KPIs: New design standard for ZIM Float for
 SSC4. Validation of Sunlit technology for SSC5. Report on corrosion of steel components. Report on UV stability
 of plastic components. Report on PLR. Quantify soiling-induced hot spot loss in 2 pilots. WPs: 2, 4, 5, 6
 SO5: Accelerated stress testing procedures for FPV components
 How SuRE achieves it: 2.2a) Develop new accelerated stress tests designed explicitly for FPV by combining
 degradation mode statistics, quantified field stress levels, and insights from modelling for three key
 stressors/degradation. KPIs: Publication and revision of pre-normative procedures. Adoption of, engagement with,
 and refinement suggestions of procedures by FPV producers and installers. WPs: 2
 HLO3. Demonstrate low impact on biodiversity and satisfy end-of-life requirements

                                                            Part B - Page 4 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                   EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

 SO6: Develop realistic targets, measurements, and monitoring to assess FPV sustainability
 How SuRE achieves it: 3.1a) Fraunhofer and Deltares will develop and validate monitoring and modelling
 methodologies for hydrological and ambient parameters relevant for assessing the interaction of FPV with
 waterbodies and ecosystems. 3.1b) Use CTI and ZIM 5 MW pilot plants as monitoring and measurement testbeds.
 3.1c) Simulation tool-chain for modeling the impact of FPV plant coverage on waterbody (oxygen levels,
 temperature change and others). KPIs: Pilot plants outfitted with extra measurement and monitoring equipment
 and routines. Sustainability data input from FPV plants other than pilots. Simulation tool-chain extended and verified
 by measurements. SuRE technology developers/off takers meet or exceed the targets developed in SuRE for positive
 environmental impact. Adoption or trailing of targets by non-SuRE commercial actor. WPs: 1, 4, 5
 SO8: Guidelines for FPV Sustainability and potential mitigation measures
 How SuRE achieves it: 3.2a) Results from 3.1), combined with identified pathways to environmental positive FPV
 and FPV designs that contribute to enhance biodiversity will be used to develop the sustainability report with pre-
 normative guideline to assess the direct impacts of FPV on aquatic systems, including on water quality and toxicity,
 biodiversity, potential mitigation measures and circularity. 3.2b) If negative impact is found, potential mitigation
 measures will be suggested and included in the guidelines. 3.2c) Further selected FPV plants available to the
 consortium will be used for broad-scale testing to ensure EU-wide applicability. 3.2d) Measurements of water
 quality and toxicity will be carried out for 10 of CTI's existing FPV sites. KPIs: Openly published sustainability
 report with guidelines to assess the direct impacts of FPV on aquatic systems and biodiversity, including potential
 mitigation measures. WPs:1, 4, 5, 6
 SO9: End-of-life recycling aspects and reduced carbon footprints for FPV components
 How SuRE achieves it: 3.3a) CTI and SABIC will work to increase the use of recycled materials in the production
 processes of the new CTI technology. They will also explore alternative materials, moving from post-industrial
 recycled HDPE to post-consumer recycled HDPE or PP, with lower carbon footprints. 3.3b) ZIM technology will
 have reduced material consumption because of more accurate engineering for different SSC. 3.3c) Sunlit will explore
 if recycled and/or thinner Al can fulfil the requirements of their floater using the new knowledge on Al requirements
 from detailed modelling of aluminum pressing. 3.2d) Ensure that the components satisfy end-of-life recycling
 aspects. KPIs: ZIM aims to reduce material consumption and CO2 footprint of ZIMFloat by 20%. CTI aims to move
 from post-industrial to post-consumer recycled material. Sunlit aims to cut Al material consumption by 50% and
 evaluate use of recycled Al. Documented LCAs and end-of-life recycling aspects for each technology. WPs:1,4,5,6
 HLO4. Reduce hesitancy to invest in FPV power plants
 SO9: Enable accurate prediction of LCOE for FPV Power Plants
 How SuRE achieves it: 4.1a) Develop add-ins and tables to improve accuracy of energy yield assessments (EYA)
 for FPV power plants using existing, bankable PV modelling tools. 4.1b) Streamline LCOE calculations to accelerate
 investment process, also including propagating uncertainty analysis. 4.1c) Identify the most sensitive parameters
 through Pareto front analysis for historical and forthcoming FPV plants. KPIs: Publications on detailed EYA inputs
 for FPV in PVsyst. Sensitivity analysis of FPV plant decisions on LCOE. WPs: 3, 4, 5, 6
 Spec f c Object ve 0: Reduce "soft" barr ers for deployment of PV power plants
 How SuRE achieves it: 4.2a) Facilitate communication between the public and FPV providers through
 documentary film, social media platforms, and hearing sessions with societal stakeholders. KPIs: Attendance and
 engagement with hearing sessions, social media engagement, distribution of documentaries. WPs: 7, 8

1.1.2 Ambition and Progress beyond State of the Art

Sustainability guidelines Currently, an FPV project will usually require an environmental permit (or equivalent).
Identification of impacts the FPV project might have in and around the deployment location is done through an
environmental impact assessment (EIA). The EIA should include impact on i) flora and fauna ii) habitats iii) noise
iv) visual v) soil, and vi) water quality and human health. To support such assessments, however, existing literature
on local environmental impacts of FPV systems is limited, with mostly suggestive and unsupported findings, and
significant methodological limitations. SuRE will go beyond this state-of-the-art by establishing a set of sustainability
evaluation metrics and a sustainability monitoring methodology for FPV and employing this at SuRE-demonstrator
and -associated FPV sites. The results will be used to validate models, which will then be used to map out
combinations of FPV technologies and European waterbody-types relevant for FPV. Further, SuRE will engage with
stakeholders to integrate nature-inclusive principles and climate-adaptivity in FPV design, not currently an integrated
part of the design principles. The research will lead to guidelines for FPV designs and deployment to minimize
potential negative impacts and enhance positive impacts on biodiversity and climate adaptivity.

                                                            Part B - Page 5 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                   EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

Carbon footprint and life-cycle impact of FPV technology. In addition to local impacts at the deployment location,
the production of the components making up the FPV system also has sustainability implications. Preliminary
analysis by TNO indicate that besides the PV modules, the floaters currently dominate the CO2 footprint. Further,
the analysis showcased how a framework to fully assess the life cycle impacts of FPV is lacking. SuRE will go beyond
this state-of-the-art by reducing CO2-footprint of the three SuRE FPV technologies. The project developments will
allow significantly reduced material consumption of plastics (CTI), steel (ZIM) and aluminium (Sunlit) for the
floaters, as well as sourcing of plastics and aluminium from lower grade (e.g., plastics from bio-based monomers)
and/or recycled material. Further, SuRE will develop an FPV-specific LCA framework, incorporating both global
impacts from the production of FPV components, as well as local impacts on e.g., ecosystems and water quality.

FPV specific accelerated stress tests. Commercially available PV panels and components are developed based on
GPV experience, as is existing qualification and safety test standards (e.g., IEC 61215, IEC 61730). New risks
specific to FPV calls for adapted or new standards to be developed, due to altered stress profiles for mechanical loads,
humidity, salt exposure and fouling. Tests to go into such standards have yet to be established, validated, or adopted
by the market. SuRE will go beyond this state-of-the-art by building required scientific basis of FPV-specific
degradation mode statistics and stress profiles. This will be combined with development of modelling tools to allow
transferability and extrapolation between technologies and SSCs. On this basis, FPV specific accelerated stress tests
will be developed. These will contribute to establish recommended practices and pre-normative protocols, moving
the community towards dedicated FPV qualification standards.

Accurate EYA modelling tool for FPV. State-of-the art EYA modelling PV tools, such as PVsyst, SAM and
HelioScope do not address FPV-specific issues that affect the yield and performance of FPV systems. Lacking model
concepts include i) influence of all relevant parameters for module temperature calculations, ii) influence of WIML,
and iii) appropriate values for soiling losses and PLR/system degradation. These introduce significant uncertainty in
EYA- and consequently LCOE-estimates, lowering investor appetite and hampering targeted technology innovation.
In addition, standard LCOE schemes assume small standard deviations of the input variables, which need not be the
case. SuRE will go beyond this state-of-the-art by developing new, accurate and FPV-specific modelling tools that
can be used as add-ons for existing bankable EYA tools for PV power plants, such as PVsyst. We will also develop
adapted procedures to obtain and establish recommended values for heat loss coefficients, WIML, soiling losses and
PLR for FPV systems. This will improve LCOE calculations in general, and those used specifically to evaluate
SuRE's technological innovations. The LCOE calculations will further use enhanced uncertainty propagation
methods for LCOE calculations, to calculate probabilities for profitability. Lastly, the improved yield models will be
input to a digital twin for the CTI pilot. Implemented in the asset management, the digital twin can improve the
predictive capacity of the monitoring software relative to today's commercial solutions and hence reduce O&M costs.

Redesign of floaters and anchoring to reduce CAPEX/SBOS and increase structural integrity. LCOE of FPV
power plants is generally 12-25% higher than for GPV, mainly from added SBoS costs of floaters. In addition, low-
CAPEX FPV technologies need to increase their structural integrity to adapt to higher SSCs and thereby expand the
FPV market. SuRE will go beyond this state-of-the-art by developing an FPV-specific modelling chain for
mechanical loads, combining advanced hydrodynamic, computational fluid dynamics and component finite-element
modelling (FEM). This will allow proper optimization of system and component structural integrity while reducing
net material consumption for floaters and anchoring by avoiding over-engineering, for all SuRE FPV technologies.

New FPV technology from CTI. CTI's established FPV technology, Hydrelio, uses standard PV modules mounted
on blow-moulded HDPE on plastic floaters. This CTI design is Europe's most-installed FPV technology. SuRE will
go beyond this state-of-the-art by developing and demonstrating a novel CTI design, radically new in both installation
and layout (patent pending, FR310956, filed in France in 2020). The design decreases carbon footprint and LCOE.
SuRE will support this technology development both through general and technology-specific innovations. This
includes the development of a new maintenance device to match the new design and significantly reduce cost.

Optimization and standardization of ZIM's FPV technology for higher SSCs. ZIM uses standard PV modules
mounted on steel structures, which are embedded in HDPE floaters. This technology is used in Europe's largest FPV
plant of 41 MW, 76 000 modules. ZIM and BayWa currently have standard design practices for WMO SSC 3 (wave
height 0.5-1.25 m). Due to lack of measurement data and modelling tools, however, projects at higher SSC are done
on case-by-case basis and have the steel structure and mooring system systematically overdesigned, to ensure
integrity. SuRE will go beyond this state-of-the-art by making measurements, model- and design-improvements, and
testing of new structural components to optimize and standardize the structure for rougher sea states. This will expand
ZIM's markets, drive down cost, and lower material-use by avoiding over-engineering.

                                                            Part B - Page 6 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                   EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

Digital optimization cycle for Sunlit's floater design. Sunlit applied for two patents in 2019, has a production
facility in Askim, Norway, has built 10 prototypes for R&D, and recently shipped its first commercial delivery. Sunlit
integrates the module directly on top of an aluminum floater. It is an FPV solution that is robust for many waters,
allow for a high degree of prefabrication, has good thermal contact with the water and is rapid to deploy. However,
the current floater design is sub-optimized, due to a time-consuming and expensive optimization cycle. SuRE will go
beyond this state-of-the-art by coupling the aforementioned mechanical modelling-chain to a SuRE-developed
modelling tool for their aluminum press process and to heat transfer modelling, to allow dramatically accelerated
multi-dimensional digital optimization of Sunlit's floater-design.

1.1.3 Project Positioning in terms of R&I maturity
Main activities in SuRE cover developing and piloting new technologies for use in FPV power plants. Developments
span from novel concepts and products by Europe's largest FPV technology providers to the introduction of new
materials, approaches, and design modifications to radically enhance existing FPV components and products. We
bring together Europe's leading commercial and research expertise within FPV. Through SuRE, FPV deployment
will increase as we provide solutions to overcome today's key barriers for increased FPV adoption: 1) documentation
of, and guidelines for, sustainable deployment on a broad set of waterbodies; 2) enhanced structural integrity for low-
cost FPV technologies to extend to offshore conditions; and 3) reduced LCOE to increase competitiveness against
other, land-consuming or polluting, electricity production. Table 1.3 summarizes SuRE's TRL advances for key
technological components. Specific technical activities to reach these TRLs are given in the indicated WPs.

Table 1.3: Innovation Advancement Ladder in SuRE (*TRLi, TRLf: Initial and Final Technology Readiness Level).

                                   INNOVATION ADVANCEMENT LADDER IN SuRE

Innovation                           Current limitations, Partners, TRLi/TRLf and involved WPs

Sustainability Guidelines to         Current limitation: Unclear or vague targets for sustainability in FPV and
support better environmental         the impact of coverage on water quality. Insufficient knowledge base to
impact assessments for FPV           carry out ESIA for FPV. Sustainability often a concern in policy and
                                     permitting. Partners: ALL, TRL3/TRL6, WPs:1,4,5,6
Enhanced use of recycled plastic     Current limitation: Production of floater structures are carbon intensive.
for FPV components                   Partners: CTI, SABIC, TRL4/TRL6, WPs: 1, 4, 5, 6
Pre-normative accelerating stress    Current limitations: Accelerated stress tests exists only for GPV, no
tests                                standards are yet set for FPV specific stress profiles. Partners: TNO, IFE,
                                     Fraunhofer, CTI, LKY, ZIM, BayWa, Sunlit, Metsolar, TRL5/TRL6, WP: 2
Accurate EYA modelling tool for      Current limitation: State-of-the art tools used to assess bankability and
FPV                                  LCOE from FPV systems cannot address FPV specific factors. Partners:
                                     ALL, TRL3/TRL6 WPs: 2, 3
Optimization of anchoring            Current limitation: Anchoring systems are typically dimensioned for worst
systems based on more detailed       case scenarios, driving up CAPEX and LCOE. Partners: CTI, LKY, ZIM,
simulation of loads                  BayWa, Sunlit, IFE, TNO, TRL4/TRL6, WPs: 4, 5, 6, 2
Redesign ZIM Float SBoS and          Current limitation: LCOE of FPV generally 15-25% > than for GPV.
connectors to increase structural    Expand today's low-cost, inland FPV solutions to rougher environments.
integrity and reduce CAPEX.          Partners: ZIM, BayWa, TNO, IFE, Fraunhofer, TRL3/TRL6, WPs: 4, 2, 3
New CTI technology designed to       Current limitation: LCOE of FPV power plants generally 15-25% higher
reduce CAPEX                         than for GPV. Partners: CTI, LKY, IFE, TNO, Fraunhofer,
                                     TRL4/TRLpilot5/TRL6. WPs: 4, 2, 3
Develop new maintenance device,      Current limitation: Walkways are used to provide access to FPV systems
removing the need of walkways,       for O&M but are driving up CAPEX.
to be tested on the Pilot            Partners: CTI, LKY, TRL3/TRL7, WP: 4
Mitigation measures identified in    Current limitation: Production of PV modules with adaptions for rougher
WP2 realized in an industrial        FPV applications is not undertaken due to economics of scale Partners:
production line at Metsolar          Metsolar, TRL2/TRL6, WP2
Integrated model-chain for Sunlit    Current limitation: Inconvenient and expensive procedure for design
floater optimization (Al pressing,   improvements of Al float.
heat transfer & structural integr.)  Partners: Sunlit, IFE. TRL2/TRL6, WPs: 6, 1, 2, 3

#žPRJ-OBJ-POž#

                                                            Part B - Page 7 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                   EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

1.2 Methodology #@CON-MET-CM@# #@COM-PLE-CP@#

SuRE achieves its objectives by innovating along two main lines: general developments beneficial for the whole
industry, and specific developments to enhance the 3 individual FPV technologies of SuRE. The project methodology
will in the following be presented under the headlines of Sustainability, Reliability and Efficiency. In each of these
sub-sections, the general methodology will be presented first, and then the technology-specific approaches for each
of the value chains: CTI (with LKY), ZIM (with BayWa), and Sunlit (with Metsolar). Each technology developer is
making improvements to their own FPV technology, central to reach the companies' expansion targets, as well as
the overall SuRE objectives. The innovations and associated pilots to be built in the project are described below.

 Overview of the technology innovations and associated pilots
 The overall goal of CTI in SuRE is to develop their innovative design. The new layout reduces ground transport to
 site, while also increasing material and surface efficiency for light harvesting by reducing maintenance gangways.
 Developments of this technology, to keep in line with CTI and LKY practices, requires co-optimization of material
 sustainability, O&M practices, ecologically beneficial spaces, FPV reliability, and LCOE reduction. CTI and
 LKY will build a 5 MW pilot during the first 18 months of SuRE. The pilot site is selected, and CTI's new design
 is ready for rollout. A first prototype island of 150 panels has been built and is floating at CTI's test site. A smaller
 50 kW pre-pilot will be built immediately after project initiation, to prepare for the larger pilot. The 5 MW pilot will
 cover at least 5 ha of the 15.3 ha
 waterbody, using minimum 8000
 modules of 650 W. Pilot sensorics
 will provide data also beyond the
 project period. Planning
 permission for the site was in
 January 2023.

 The overall goal of ZIM in SuRE is to expand their market by enabling deployments in rougher conditions. Their
 present large-scale FPV installations are mostly on fresh inland waters like water reservoirs and quarry ponds; in
 corrosion category C3 (medium) and with significant wave heights under 1 m, thus SSC 1-3. Components and
 standard design practices will be improved and updated based on measurements and model improvements in SuRE
 to move to SSC 4, also allowing for more corrosive environments. ZIM and BayWa will build a 5 MW pilot plant
 in the second half of SuRE to put these new designs and components to the test. The pilot will incorporate up-to-
 date developments specific to the ZIM Float technology
 and the generalizable Sustainability, Reliability, and
 Efficiency activities. The pilot site in the Netherlands will
 also be used for pre-, mid-, and post-install studies for
 water quality, shoreline effects and ecology. Once built, the
 pilot is a platform with a commitment to future access for
 study. With the pilot constructed in the middle of the
 project period, we will report on one annual cycle of
 operation before project end.
 The overall goal of Sunlit in SuRE is to optimize their floater design to unlock significant improvements in LCOE
 and sustainability, while maintaining a sturdy design. In Sunlit's design two aluminum sheets pressed into an egg-
 carton-like design face each other and trap air to make a pontoon; the PV module is affixed directly to the top
 aluminum sheet. Heat is efficiently transferred via the metal and into the water. Neighboring floats are connected to
 each other with controllable hinging, in accordance with expected waves. Sunlit's design has received preliminary
 DNV verification. The present Sunlit design uses partially optimized aluminum pressing. Key improvements
 pursued in SuRE are reduced aluminum consumption, increased digital prototyping to reduce time-to-prototype
 construction, and increased
 production throughput and
 automation. Sunlit and Metsolar
 will build a 100 kW-pilot during
 SuRE, with extra sensors and
 monitoring to support the
 generalizable results, also beyond
 the project period. The pilot will be
 deployed on the coast of Norway.

                                                            Part B - Page 8 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                   EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

1.2.1 Towards Sustainable, Reliable and Efficient FPV Power plants

1.2.1.1 Sustainable FPV power plants (WP1 + WP4-6)

Challenges and opportunities related to FPV sustainability can be broadly categorized into (1) local impacts, resulting
from the FPV system deployment at the site, and (2) global impacts, from producing components that go into the
FPV system. For each of these, impact must be evaluated within three dimensions of sustainability - economic, social,
and environmental. SuRE will provide a comprehensive scientific knowledge base looking at all these dimensions
and their interaction, particularly focusing on the environmental impact of FPV installations.

Assessing the local environmental impact of FPV deployment. As given in Section 1.1.2, there are severe limitations
in the knowledge base underpinning the environmental impact assessments (EIAs) required prior to the building of
an FPV plant. In SuRE, we will fill these knowledge gaps by combining monitoring and modelling.

                                                                                           Monitoring data (in-situ) of the key
                                                                                           parameters of the water body, food web
                                                                                           and the ecosystems are needed. The food
                                                                                           web describes who eats whom in an
                                                                                           ecological community. Food webs help
                                                                                           us understand how changes to
                                                                                           ecosystems affect many different
species. Anticipated effects of FPV include the limitation of sunlight penetration into the water column and changes
in water temperatures. In this way FPV affects the foundation of food webs, namely photosynthesis; the production
of food and oxygen. We therefore focus our monitoring efforts on light penetration, oxygen, temperature, nutrients,
and the production of phytoplankton. Today, experience on measuring these parameters under and around an FPV
system is limited. Therefore, SuRE will develop a monitoring strategy for the project demonstrators to capture any
relevant effect under and around an FPV system both in the temporal and spatial domain. This monitoring strategy
will be used to gather relevant data from the project pilots and existing SuRE-associated plants, as input to
sustainability guidelines and modelling. The monitoring data will be complemented by gathered system knowledge,
a term referring to information on the waterbodies and surrounding landscape. Examples of such data is water body
depth, nutrient loads, currents, water exchange, type of agriculture in the vicinity etc. Such knowledge is crucial to
understand the processes leading to changes in water quality and biodiversity.

A major impact of FPV installations on waterbodies is the latter's change of energy balance through the blockage of
light. In waterbodies, this triggers changes in thermal stratification, cycles of chemical compounds and food-webs,
affecting biodiversity below and eventually also above the water surface. In this project, the dependency of light
penetration on several FPV designs will be modelled through standard tools that are mainly based on raytracing
algorithms, namely Delft3D, BIGEYE and a RADIANCE-based module in the yield simulation tool-chain ZENIT.

Alongside data gathering and light simulations, hydrological modelling is needed to forecast consequences for
biodiversity (algae, submerged vegetation, mussels, fish, and birds) under a varied number of technological
conditions in different waterbodies. To this end, two complementary modeling frameworks will be used: First, the
Fraunhofer FPV-GLM, an enhanced General Lake Model, will be used with its biogeochemical aquatic ecodynamics
(AED2) submodel. This is a fast 1-D model, suitable to explore a wide and representative range of European
waterbodies in different climate zones. As a function of the water coverage ratio and resulting ratio of blocked
irradiation, the model will be used to map out each waterbody's energy balance. This will result in estimates of the
maximum ratio of blocked irradiation beyond which water quality and biodiversity criteria given by the Water
Framework Directive 2000/60/EV are violated. Further, the expected evaporation reduction will be recorded. This
exploratory work focusing on a broad selection of waterbodies will be validated and complemented by more detailed
(temporal and spatial) modelling with Delft3D. This model captures the impact of FPV systems on waterbody
hydrodynamics and temperature in three spatial dimensions. It will be employed for a smaller subset of typical
waterbodies, including those with SuRE demonstrators or SuRE-associated FPV plants already deployed. In the
neighborhood of values approximated by the FPV-GLM, maximum ratios of blocked radiation will be evaluated in
a much more detailed manner by Delft3D. Similarly, computed functional dependencies of evaporation rates on
coverage ratios and FPV designs will be compared across model frameworks used by Fraunhofer, Deltares and IFE.
Calibration (when necessary) as well as validation of both models will be achieved through the aforementioned
monitoring data from demonstrators. Additional to an improved understanding of the applicability of each modelling
tool, including error evaluation, this will result in a catalogue of maximum permissible FPV coverage ratios of
European waterbodies differentiated by waterbody type and different FPV designs.

                                                            Part B - Page 9 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                            EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

The potential of positive local environmental impact from FPV deployment. SuRE strives beyond minimizing
negative local impacts and explores possibilities to achieve positive local impacts of the FPV system. This will be
done by enhancing the integration of nature inclusive and climate adaptive principles in FPV system design. In this
process, proper involvement of and interaction between stakeholders will be crucial. A range of different
methodologies exists for facilitating and supporting participation and stakeholder processes. Within the setting of
this project, we will use a specific method of action research: group model building (GMB). GMB is a visual and
practically useful method for stakeholder participation in water management to develop and improve decision support
models as well as integrate existing information with local/stakeholder knowledge. Using GMB we will organize
design sessions on the SuRE demonstration sites with technicians, landscape designers and ecologists, where various
designs will be evaluated. Focus will be on achieving a joint definition of barriers and enablers for achieving
sustainable FPV system designs, encompassing both the social, economic, and environmental dimensions. Further, a
set of sustainable design examples will be developed. Ultimately, we will create and share guidelines for development
and implementation of FPV solutions with a minimally negative and/or maximally positive environmental impact.

Sustainability impacts of the FPV system components and materials; a global LCA perspective including
circularity. In addition to the study of local impacts at the deployment site, SuRE will use life-cycle assessment
methodology to quantify material use, energy use, and related emissions during product and service life cycle. SuRE
will compute, for all components of the three SuRE technologies, the CO2 footprint and other environmental
footprints using procedures like EF 3.0 or ReCiPe. This work will serve to guide and quantitatively assess changes
in design and material selection, and to evaluate end-of-life recycling options, which will be further elaborated below.

To advance state-of-the-art, SuRE will also develop a more comprehensive FPV-specific LCA framework. The LCA
will build on data from sustainability analyses of SuRE waterbodies, including metrics and impact categories that
quantify effects of FPV installations on waterbody biodiversity. A first approach has been tentatively explored for
FPV3 by addressing ecosystem damage through relative biodiversity loss. In SuRE, we will extend the LCA
biodiversity metrics to provide a framework for holistic, cradle-to-grave LCA comparisons of different FPV designs.

Technology specific design changes, material selections and recycling possibilities. Plastics are a major part of the
system for the FPV-technologies of CTI and ZIM, as well as for many other major FPV-technologies, through the
high-density polyethylene (HDPE) buoys providing the system's buoyancy. SuRE brings together a plastics producer,
FPV technology designers, FPV system suppliers, and research institutes to tackle a number of challenges related to
this floater plastic. SuRE will assess the possibility of shifting production of the floaters from off-site blow molding
to on-site injection molding. This would remove the need to transport excessive volumes (air trapped within the
floaters) to site and opens the possibility to use polypropylene (PP). CO2 footprint, and material and energy use are
lower for PP compared to HDPE. Further, material sourcing from bio-based monomers and/or recycled polymer will
be pursued. In the assessment and design of these solutions, SABIC will use their extensive experience and toolbox
in predictive engineering for sustainable plastics. Combined with close collaboration between the partners along the
value chain, this will ensure a comprehensive evaluation of the viability and proper implementation of the proposed
solutions. In this work, circularity-by-design will be an inherent part of the consortium's approach.

For Sunlit's FPV-technology on the other hand, aluminum floaters provide buoyancy and is a major contributor to
environmental footprint. Sunlit will use tools developed in SuRE to pursue the use of lower grade and lower volumes
of aluminum. Such changes are expected to give substantially lower carbon emissions, which will be assessed by the
LCA approach. A similar exercise will be performed on ZIM's technology, where advances achieved in SuRE will
allow more exact and location-targeted dimensioning of the steel structures, decreasing material consumption.

1.2.1.2 Reliable FPV power plants (WP2 + WP4-6)
The historically established reliability learning cycle has served the PV industry well. It consists of three over-arching
steps: (1) Field deployment of PV systems, (2) Failure- and degradation-mode characterization and analysis, and (3)
Development of accelerated stress tests in the lab to screen rapidly for these failure and degradation modes4. In the
face of reliability issues present in an FPV configuration, however, the established learning cycle is challenged in
multiple ways. These will be described in the following paragraphs, alongside a description of the approach SuRE
will employ to tackle these methodological challenges.

Statistics on failure and degradation modes. Open information on failure and degradation mode statistics from FPV
sites is notoriously hard to come by, effectively inhibiting progress through the existing learning cycle. Although
studies of material degradation in maritime environments are available, these do not focus on the exact materials and
technology options of state-of-the-art PV. Consortium partners have previously collected incidental observations on
FPV degradation modes, as summarized in Table 1.4. Building on this, SuRE will perform targeted campaigns to

                                                                              Part B - Page 10 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                    EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

establish the first statistically relevant mapping of degradation modes in the FPV configuration.

To this end, we use a combination of aerial infrared thermography (aIRT), statistically sampled field characterization
through current-voltage (IV) scans and visual inspection, and root-cause analysis of selected modules in the
laboratory. We will use both commercial and research systems available to the consortium. To speed up the process
of reaching relevant statistics, time-series analysis on string level will be combined with aIRT to efficiently detect
and quantify effects of various degradation modes5.

Table 1.4 Collection of incidentally observed degradation and failure modes in FPV

Circumstance System or component                            Failure modes

specific for FPV

Mechanical        System                                    Lost mechanical system- and/or mooring- integrity

loads from        Plastic components                        Rubbing damage
waves, wind,      Plastic&metal components                  Mechanical-stress induced damage
water currents,   PV panels                                 Glass cracking or deformation; PV cell cracking
and water-level   Float interconnectors                     Accelerated materials fatigue, connectors breakage
variations

                  Inverter                                  Internal electrical disconnect ("electrical open") induced by

                                                            continuous movements

                  Cables                                    Acc. wear of cable mantles induced by continuous movements

Humidity and      Steel and aluminum parts                  Accelerated corrosion
corrosion         PV panels                                 Moisture ingress in the panel; accelerated pot. ind. degradation

                  Inverter                                  Corrosion induced defects

                  Electrical system                         Enlarged leakage currents, inverter shutdown

Pollution and     PV panels                                 Hot spot ind. failures: diode failures, burn marks, microcracks
fouling           PV panels                                 Accelerated output loss from (in)organic fouling

FPV specific stress profiles. Stress tests in the traditional learning cycle are, by design, highly empirical and lack
well-established links to true stress levels. Instead, the tests are merely a means of ensuring that components meet a
certain minimum quality level, in accordance with historical precedent. When module manufacturers still provide
25- and 30-year warranties (partly) based on these tests, it is guided by prior evidence that such lifetimes can be
achieved by modules meeting this minimum quality level. The experience comes from GPV systems and traditional
module architectures, however, and it is not clear how transferable this is to FPV. Further, only relying on degradation
mode mappings of young systems (which is the only thing available for FPV) when developing accelerated stress
tests can miss degradation modes that become prominent later in the plant's lifetime. Indeed, stressors that are
expected to be more severe for FPV compared to GPV, such as humidity and repeated mechanical loads, are important
for mid-life and wear-out degradation modes such as delamination, corrosion, or fatigue breakage. Thus, assessing
applicability of current test frameworks, both on short- and long-term, requires knowledge about actual stress levels,
which is currently lacking for FPV. SuRE will map out the profiles of key stressors for selected floating PV
technologies by deploying targeted sensors at selected sites. These profiles will be compared to stress profiles for
GPV6ş8 to assess where the largest differences are; hence the potential shortcomings of the current test framework.
A special focus will be on the implications for mid-life and late-life degradation.

                                                                 Accelerating the reliability learning cycle by help of
                                                                 modelling. The conventional reliability learning cycle is
                                                                 inherently slow, and it is struggling to keep up with the
                                                                 presently accelerating pace of the PV industry. FPV
                                                                 represents a particularly challenging case, as the combination
                                                                 of diverse deployment locations (in terms of wave-heights,
                                                                 currents, salt- vs freshwater, etc) and diverse floater
                                                                 technologies (pontoon, platform, membrane, etc) gives a very
                                                                 large range of conditions to test, and limited transferability
                                                                 between cases. Therefore, there is a strong need to move to a
more modelling-based learning cycle, enabling accelerated learning in the digital realm9. SuRE will develop
modelling-based reliability assessment for three key stressors/degradation modes for FPV (Table 1.4). First, a
modelling chain will be established capable of assessing mechanical loads throughout the FPV system and down to

                                                            Part B - Page 11 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                    EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

specific components. This modelling chain can assess different combinations of technology, anchoring/mooring, and
water body conditions. Second, the effects on the PV module of the increased humidity stress in the FPV
configuration will be assessed, using gathered FPV humidity stress profiles as input. And third, the effects of
increased levels of bird droppings and frequency and severity of hotspots will be evaluated with thermal modelling.

For the mechanical load modelling, the supporting structures used to keep the power producing and electrical
components afloat and in place will be a central focus area. Assessing mechanical loads on these structures, especially
when going to rougher sea-states, is a complex problem much beyond what is encountered for support structures in
GPV. To address this properly, SuRE will take advantage of advances in floating wind technology. IFE's Wind
department has, for more than a decade, developed an in-house aero-hydro-servo-elastic simulation software
(3DFloat)10 used for floating platforms for wind turbines, floating bridges and floating docks. 3DFloat is thus ideally
suited for the FPV challenges at hand. It will be specifically tailored and adjusted for FPV in this project.

Pre-normative accelerated stress test development. By combining degradation mode statistics, quantified field stress
levels, and insights from modelling, SuRE will develop an accelerated stress testing regime for FPV. By establishing
the accelerated stress tests based on this triplet of input, SuRE will carve out a testing regime which will be easier to
adapt and extrapolate to new waters and markets of FPV. This will be of vital importance to the industry as the market
matures. The tests and their scientific basis will be disseminated in a white paper on reliability testing for FPV.
Further, the developed accelerating stress tests will be used to assess the efficacy of reliability risk-mitigation
strategies developed in the project in close collaboration with SuRE technology providers.

Technology specific design changes and materials selections for ensured and enhanced reliability. It is of outmost
importance to ensure that all technology-specific innovations are compatible with reliability requirements. For CTI,
the new design will lead to changes to the internal island forces, info on which is required to properly design the
anchoring system, joints, mounting pieces for PV modules, and electrical components bringing the electricity to
shore. Data and gathered experience from the SuRE pilot will be of central importance to this work. New material
candidates with improved sustainability will be evaluated by accelerated stress testing. For ZIM, a central idea is to
optimize the use of flexible joints in two cases: (1) between some (but not all) of the PV boats and (2) between the
island and mooring lines. Each flexible joint is more expensive than a rigid connector, but the structural demands of
the island, mooring, and anchoring system can be reduced with the right design. Lower forces and lower uncertainty
in forces means an optimized design for conditions and therefore decreased steel use and anchoring costs. Lab-based
testing will accompany component and plant design. The test parameters will come from a) measurements and
correlation with metocean conditions at existing plants, and b) testing at the pilot site before construction.
Measurements of conditions which accelerate ageing, and therefore feed into design needs, are forces, vibrations,
motion, humidity, and time of wetness from splashing. With this information, relevant testing conditions will be set
for dynamic loads on cable bending, inverter and transformer shaking, construction and connector bending, float and
system buoyancy, mooring systems, and so forth. Component design updates include changing materials; improving
protection for weathering, UV, and corrosion; and optimizing for efficiency and sustainability. The results become
input to standard design practice for SSC 4 (moderate). For Sunlit, the floater design will be optimized to harvest
potential reductions in CAPEX and LCOE. The model-chain for mechanical loads will be central to ensure that this
optimization process is fully compatible with reliable operation in the targeted waters. The thermal exchange between
module and water through the float will also be optimized; a lower operating temperature will have implications for
most degradation processes as they are typically thermally activated.

Table 1.5 ZIM's approach to rougher waters in both generalizable WPs 1-3 and in WP 5

Materials and        Ě Corrosion protection for higher salinity and further corrosion categories

component design     Ě Accommodation of water icing in different scenarios

                     Ě Long-time UV protection with HDPE additives

                     Ě Structure design and material selection for profile design, connection, etc.

Modelling            Ě Higher wind speed and WMO SSC 4, including wave barrier concepts

                     Ě Simulations for higher snow loads

Lab tests for        Ě Corrosion tests to represent targeted new water conditions

individual           Ě Testing HDPE to represent targeted new water conditions
components           Ě Fatigue simulations and tests for cables, inverters, connectors, etc.

                     Ě Vibration of electrical components, connections points

Force tests          Ě Resilience of structure and components adapted from WP2 methods

Testing, 5 MW pilot  Ě Adapt system design to incorporate innovative components/concepts

                                                            Part B - Page 12 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                    EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

1.2.1.3 Increased efficiency and cost-competitiveness of FPV power plants (WP3 + WP4-6)
The approach of SuRE to improve efficiency and cost-competitiveness of FPV will be two-fold. First, important
knowledge gaps related to doing proper EYA of FPV will be closed. This will drive down cost both by improving
bankability of FPV projects and by easing project planning. Further, the improved understanding will help the
technology providers optimize their designs for improved efficiency and lifetime energy yield.

                                                                                             Analysis of FPV production data.
                                                                                             Data analytics of FPV power plants is
                                                                                             an active and relatively new research
                                                                                             field, while more progress has been
                                                                                             made towards advanced and robust
                                                                                             data analytics for GPV. IFE,
                                                                                             Fraunhofer and TNO have both
published in scientific literature and worked directly with industry on PV power plant analytics. The research partners
are international forerunners on this topic and have built substantial libraries of relevant algorithms developed both
internally and externally. For determining performance ratio (PR), soiling, degradation rates, and other important
parameters, we require data filtering and analytics algorithms optimized for the exact parameter in addition to well-
instrumented sites. The research adheres to recommended standards for instrumentation, monitoring, and filtering.
Because the existing standards and algorithms are based on experience from GPV only, a continuous part of SuRE
is to assess to which degree these are sufficient. The analysis framework exploits renowned analytics libraries,
particularly PVlib and Rdtools.

More accurate energy-yield assessments
Accurate PV module operating temperature in FPV applications. A frequently stated advantage of FPV over GPV is
reduced module temperature from water cooling, resulting in a higher power conversion efficiency. Many generic
and non-bankable claims have been made about enhanced cooling of FPV11,12, and continue to be repeated even in
high-impact reports13. These claims, however, under-communicate the strong dependence of module temperature on
the specific FPV technology. Recent results and publications indicate that the cooling effect on typical pontoon-based
floaters is, in fact, modest11,12,14. A clear understanding and quantification of cooling effects for different FPV floater
technologies is currently lacking15. Uncertainty in predicting cooling-enhanced performance directly converts into
EYA and LCOE uncertainties. Recently published best-practice guidelines from DNV GL state that it is
"recommended to apply different thermal loss factors for different types of systems and different float
technologies"16. Lacking appropriate simulation software and technology-specific recommended thermal loss factors,
however, the current "best practice procedure is to determine the thermal loss factors for FPV systems through
application of technology-specific measurements"16. To diversify available data for technology and climatic
characteristics and address unanswered questions for performance and cooling of various FPV technologies,
therefore, it is critical to collect and analyze field data from a range of systems. SuRE will accompany this analysis
with modelling to establish climatic dependence of a) heat loss coefficients (U-values) for different FPV technologies,
and b) influence of module temperatures variations over the power plant.

FPV and GPV mounting structures are very different. Standard GPV models to compute cell temperature and U-
value, therefore, are not always valid for FPV. Detailed information on the applied materials and geometrical design
of the different FPV systems will be used as a basis for the analyses. We will build complete thermal models for FPV
power plants, including effects of conduction, radiation, air flow/convection and evaporation. Thermal and fluid
mechanical modelling will be carried out with commercial computational fluid dynamics (CFD) software ANSYS
FLUENT. The model will output PV module temperatures as a function of irradiation, air temperature, water
temperature, and wind. The PV module temperatures will subsequently be used as input to calculations of
performance, yield and, subsequently, LCOE of the FPV power plant in PVsyst.

Quantifying wave-induced mismatch losses for FPV. TNO introduced the WIML concept 201917. IFE complemented
the work with an alternative methodology in 202218. Initial estimates have been computed for only a few wave states
and no technology-specific calculations have been made. Computed losses are yet to be field-verified. DNV GL's
best-practice handbook16 suggests a simplified approach of using a ▒ 2░ devitaion and setting the lowest performing
value as the power output. Such coarseness lacks seasonal effects, wave state specifics and technology dependence:
it reflects the lack of, and need for more, precise and standardized methodology to determine mismatch losses.

The effects of floater and module movements on energy output greatly depend on the system design. The number of
PV modules per float, float dimensions, floater interconnection properties, electrical design, and choice of electrical

                                                            Part B - Page 13 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                    EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

components are all important. SuRE will provide a classification for FPV systems, sea states and the potential effects
of WIML. The goal is to establish WIML for different sea states to derive the net annual WIML for the three FPV
technologies at any future site when sea states are known. We will build on exsisting models developed by TNO and
IFE. To improve WIML prediction usefulness for different FPV technologies, hydrodynamic models will be
introduced to define PV module movement as a function of sea state.

Hydrodynamic modelling capabilities will be tapped from the parallell SuRE developments to allow mechanical load
modelling throughout the FPV systems. Subsequently, electrical models previously developed will be used to
calculate the mismatch in each string. The effect of different inverters/maximum power point trackers will be
analyzed; a detail not previously incorporated for WIML. Measures and cost efficiency of mitigating WIML, such
as design of string size and layout, in addition to the effect of using optimizers, will subsequently be considered. The
models will be validated in three steps. First, the orientation of individual floaters for different weather conditions,
waves and sea states will be measured with accelerometers to verify the hydrodynamic models and to calculate in-
plane irradiance for each PV module. Second, in-plane irradiation will be directly measured for each PV-module,
using fast-response irradiation sensors to validate the choice of transposition models. Finally, the electrical model
will be validated by comparing irradiance and corresponding production per module, and measured production per
string. These steps allow calculation of the wave-induced mismatch corrected Performance Ratio. We suggest this
concept to account for WIML in the same manner that temperature-corrected performance ratio is routinely used to
separate inherent Performance of the Plant, as intended in Due Diligence contracts, from weather-induced variations.

Quantifying soiling loss rates and performance loss rates (PLR) for FPV. There are currently many myths
surrounding soiling of FPV power plants. No reliable, openly available or published reference quantify this loss. In
stark contrast, references for GPV soiling are substantial. Un-remediated soiling manifests in production data
similarly as degradation and is indistinguishable from other degradation modes without the aid of additional sensors
or dedicated algorithms designed to quantify soiling. The two losses, however, are fundamentally different because
soiling losses are recoverable losses that can be mitigated with O&M routines, while degradation leads to a non-
recoverable performance loss. Hard soiling, such as bird droppings, can also cause non-recoverable losses as it may
generate hot spots with runaway module damage. This is however a secondary effect, and is avoidable by proper
O&M measures. In SuRE, we aim to separate the recoverable soiling loss from the unrecoverable system PLR.
Quantifying loss rates from each process provides valuable input to optimize cleaning routines and reduce OPEX
for FPV power plants, as well as to improving energy-yield predictions.

Monitoring data from PV power plants can be used to determine soiling losses and (non-recoverable) PLR
endogenously. Soiling losses are also commonly measured using soiling stations. Both methodologies hold expected
challenges for FPV that SuRE will address. Within one FPV plant, spatial variations of soiling from bird droppings
can occur. Whole-plant analysis using localized soiling stations is therefore inadequate. We will instead use a
procedure developed by IFE to compute soiling loss rates from time series data19. The methodology was developed
for utility scale GPV sites, with more homogeneous soiling and lower signal-to-noise ratio than what we expect for
FPV. Several approaches will be applied to adapt the methodology to FPV, such as compensation for WIML,
adaptation of data filtering, and using alternative performance metrics20. To verify the methodology and ensure that
local soiling rates computed on inverter or string level correspond to soiling levels on site, infrared and visual image
inspection will be performed for selected sites.

Choice of module technology for FPV applications. Economy of scale and little knowledge of FPV specific stressors
are reasons why there are small or no differences between PV modules used for GPV and FPV applications. With a
rapidly growing FPV market and an increasing knowledge base, this may change. MetSolar has a PV module
production line and an in-house R&D department. The starting point to identify potential FPV specific design
adaptations will be to analyze production costs for different cell and module technologies and their resulting field
efficiency. Field efficiency will depend on the mounting technology and application, which will be calculated for the
three FPV technologies in the consortium and deployment in Europe. For FPV, where the mounting structure costs
are higher compared to GPV, the tradeoff of moving to technology with higher power-conversion efficiency for
higher cost is an important consideration, taking overall LCOE into account. The choice of adaptations to MetSolar's
production line will follow from the analysis, but three likely pathways have already been identified. The first
possible pathway is related to the mounting angle in FPV applications, which is usually lower than optimal due to
the reliability and cost of the BoS structures. Standard PV module designs include coatings on the module glass and
the silicon PV cells to transmit as much light as possible into the active parts; these designs are dependent on the
angle of incidence. It is possible to increase transmission of light at non-standard angles into standard PV cells by

                                                            Part B - Page 14 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                    EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

modifying the module glass. One such option is prismatic glass, with small physical modulations that aid light
transmission, and thereby electricity production, without needing to modify anything other than the glass that
encapsulates the module. A second path is a change towards higher efficiency cells, which also infers increasing the
cell size to M10/M12. The higher BOS cost of FPV might make this a particularly interesting option. The third
potential pathway is to analyze the cost-efficiency and implement a selection of the mitigation measures for PV
modules in FPV applications, identified in the work described in Section 1.2.1.2.

LCOE calculations. To (1) compare different technological solutions and (2) assess the economic benefits of
different technological advances made within SuRE, we must establish a framework for which to perform LCOE
calculations. The framework will be directly linked with the knowledge obtained through the development of more
accurate EYA, to consider the economic effects from increased efficiency for different water bodies and locations.
Further, it will adapt enhanced uncertainty propagation methods for LCOE calculations, going beyond the classical
P50-P90 schemes. The accuracy of these standard schemes relies on assuming small standard deviations of the input
variables, which need not be the case and which the enhanced approach does not presuppose. As a result, decision
making on FPV plants is facilitated by (1) providing reliable LCOE averages and reliable uncertainties, and (2)
computing probability distributions of net-present value and thus the total probability of profitable investment.

Technology specific design changes and materials selections for enhanced efficiency. All three technologies will
draw benefits from the improvements in 1) EYA-estimates and LCOE calculations, 2) general O&M developments
such as tools to optimize cleaning cycles, 3) thermal modelling to optimize the system designs for maximized cooling,
and 4) improvements in estimations of WIML to guide necessary adjustments in design to maximize power output,
especially when moving to higher SSCs. For CTI, a key feature of their innovative design is an increased surface
efficiency by reducing maintenance walkways. To do so properly, however, requires maintenance methods which
are precisely matched to the design, which will be tested and developed in SuRE.

1.2.1 Research and Innovation activities linked to SuRE
The partners in SuRE are experienced in R&D projects, from Horizon 2020, Horizon Europe, national projects, and
bilateral industry projects. The R&I carried out in SuRE builds on previous and ongoing projects. The consortium
details 28 FPV related R&I projects in Part A. Only the R&D activities with the most direct links to SuRE are shown
below. EU projects that SuRE will link to are given in grey background.

Table 1.6 Selected research and innovation activities whose results feed into SuRE

Project                 Project aims and outputs used in SuRE

IEA PVPS Task 12 and 13 In Task 13 Fraunhofer is Leading Subtask 2 (ST.2) on Performance and Reliability

(Global)                of PV. Within ST2, the activity on FPV is lead by IFE with TNO and 15 research/

Fraunhofer, IFE, TNO    industry participants. Workshops, webinars, publication of FPV report in 2025. In

                        Task 12, TNO is active on PV Sustainability, TNO is active on LCA.

Standardization TC82/2106 Standardization effort within the International Electrotechnical Commission

Fraunhofer, BayWa       (IEC) Technical Specification, FPV power plants ş Design guidelines and

                        recommendations. Well-coordinated with SuRE through Fraunhofer and BayWa.

SUREWAVE                Securing optimal behavior of aero & hydrodynamic and structural integrity for

(HE 101083342)          offshore FPV. Concepts and results of the connectors, whole FPV system, electrial

Sunlit Sea              output, and cost-efficiency will feed in to WPs 2-6.

Trust PV                Performance and Reliability of PV plants, with a focus on GPV, but with a smaller

(HE 952957)             activity on FPV. Coordinated with SuRE through BayWa's participation in both

BayWa                   project and IFEs contact with EURAC (coordinator of Trust PV).

ZWIMP & Andijk          Continuous monitoring data below FPV system and on a reference site. 3D

(Dutch funding)         Modelling of FPV effects on water temperature. Both data and modelling

Deltares                approach for FPV will be input information to WPs 1 and 4-6.

Serendi-PV              Continued reduction of LCoE for PV and to make it possible to integrate a

(H2020 953016)          rapidly increasing share of PV power into the power networks. Yield simulations

Fraunhofer              for FPV concepts used in WPs 3 and 4-6

Pilot Oostvoornse Meer  FPV pilot on a near shore lake with brackish water from 2019 until 2023 with

(Dutch TEHE116900)      three designs. The electrical, mechanical properties and water quality are

TNO                     continuously monitored and analysed. Methods and models used in WP 1-3, 4-6.

AC Yield (Dutch TKITOE Research project on thermal behaviour of a 2 MWp FPV plant to gain insight on

                                                            Part B - Page 15 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                    EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

1821301) TNO, BayWa      the cooling effects of FPV vs GPV plant. Cooling models as used in WPs 3, 4-5.
MariSol (Norway 317808)  Development of Sunlit's FPV concept. Work on reliability and performance
IFE, Sunlit              analysis will be directly fed into WPs 2, 6.
ECLIPSE                  Ecosystem impacts from FPV. Methods, results, and assessments from ECLIPSE
(MSCA 101065785)         and SuRE can be shared, compared, and tested for broadest applicability because
2022-2025                of different specific waterbodies of application.
BOOST                    Project on offshore FPV, coordinated by Fred Olsen Renewables and with IFEs
(H2020 965671)           long-term industry-partner Ocean Sun as one of the main FPV technologies to be
                         developed. Well coordinated with efforts in SuRE through IFEs close contact with
NATURSEA-PV              Ocean Sun and Fred Olsen Renewables.
(HE 101084348 )          Developing biobased, antifouling structures for FPV. Materials, results, and
2022-2026                environmental impact from both projects can be shared for accelerated materials
                         development in both inland and offshore FPV applications.

1.2.2 Interdisciplinary work
Development of sustainable FPV power plants with long lifetimes and circular use of materials requires cooperation
between a large set of disciplines, including, but not limited to, power plant design, hydrodynamics, statistical
analysis, biology and biodiversity, sustainable plastics, aluminium and steel manufacture, PV modules, business case
development, exploitation of research and technical outcomes, technoeconomic analysis, and public engagement
through visual arts. The 12 partners of the SuRE consortium bring a balance to achieve the Outcomes set in the Call
and to contribute beyond the state of art. Through the art-meets-science vision of Compßz who leads the
communication activities, SuRE promotes public acceptance and mutual understanding at the society-policymakers-
developer nexus. Such interactions are key to rapid, responsible, and sustainable renewable energy deployment.

1.2.3 Gender dimensions in the Research and Innovation content of SuRE
The SuRE consortium recognizes the importance and potential of fostering gender equality, in line with the strategy
on gender equality adopted by Horizon Europe: A Union of Equality: Gender Equality Strategy 2020-2025. Gender
analysis will be implemented in the continuous workflow during the SuRE project. We evaluate past innovation
practices when we design new components (for instance the trend of moving to larger PV modules, making it difficult
for women installers), and ensuring women participants in the various teams to broaden perspectives and addressing
sex and gender when analyzing users and markets. We have identified areas in SuRE where gender is relevant to
enable us to implement gender dimensions in the initial planning of the R&I, basing the analysis on methods in
"Gendered Innovations: How Gender Analysis Contributes to Research" We highlight four areas in SuRE where
gender dimensions clearly impact the planning of our developments:

 Development of technical solutions such as design of walkways and O&M routines for FPV power plants.
 Development of visual tools or illustrations, for communication/dissemination purposes, user manuals, or O&M

    software, the consortium will take care to develop gender-neutral examples, images and visualization.

 Communication and dissemination activities, including work related to public acceptance of FPV power plants

    and policies related to permitting. The relationship between gender and environmental impact, and gender and
    technology are relevant here. Compßz addresses this part of SuRE specifically (See WP7 and Sec 2.2.1)

 Training of researchers and personnel for the renewable energy industry is an important Societal Impact in SuRE.

It is of outmost importance for the gender balance within the energy industry to focus on the gender dimension in
recruiting and training. A recent report from IEA21 shows that despite making up 39% of global labor force ş women
only account for 22% of the traditional energy sector. For management levels the numbers are even lower22. The low
employment rate of women in the energy sector is also certainly in part due to a pipeline problem, since there is still
a disproportionately low number of women with STEM degrees, reducing the pool of potential female applicants for
some firms and occupations. If women are not advancing in the energy sector, there will be fewer women role models
and mentors to attract more women. The barriers women face in the energy sector are similar to those they face
elsewhere in the economy. However, the challenges of the energy sector are more pressing since the sector is going
through a process of transformation; the clean energy transition will require innovative solutions and business models
to be adopted and greater participation from a diverse talent pool. The training of personnel, and women in particular,
is important for the consortium. The aim of both the research in SuRE, and the long-term goal of the participating
companies, is to develop and deploy new, RE technology. It is a benefit for the innovation and sustainability of the
individual companies to encourage a larger fraction of female employees. Increased visibility of women and non-

                                                            Part B - Page 16 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                    EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

binary scientists can inspire members of underrepresented communities to join the field, hence we will strive for
gender balance in all dissemination activities. Both SuRE and its communication partner, Compßz, are led by women.
Towards the end of the project period, we will perform an evaluation amongst the partners on how gender
perspectives were implemented in practice, what consequences it had for the research and development in the project,
and whether the work to address gender dimensions in SuRE also influenced the company in a broader sense, which
will be included in the Final Report.

1.2.4 Open Science Practice

SuRE will adopt the Horizon Europe Regulations and the Model Grant Agreement, developing a clear set of actions
to ensure that the outcomes are fully compliant with the stablished Open Science rules. The partners will be
responsible for publishing non-confidential outcomes in local and international press, at conferences in the form of
papers, and in peer-reviewed scientific journals. SuRE will ensure that all the publications can be read online, are
downloadable and printable and freely available online with no restrictions on use, by depositing them in a repository.
All the peer reviewed articles will be made Open Access after publication, without embargo periods, following the
rules set by the European Commission. Several open access repositories will be considered, such as the Open Access
Infrastructure for Research in Europe (OpenAIRE), the Registry of Open Access Repositories (ROAR) and the
Directory of Open Access Repositories (OpenDOAR). A decision will be taken for every specific case and all the
partners engaged in publication activities have a dedicated budget to cover the open access fees. The Consortium
fully adheres to the principle "as open as possible, as closed as necessary" set by the European Commission to allow
the outcomes to reach society whilst protecting the IPRs of the companies involved in the co-development of the
technical solutions for the RIs. Most WPs will have several public deliverables so that the knowledge can be shared
freely with all relevant stakeholders (research community, industry, and regulators). Deliverables that are considered
confidential will be shared with stakeholders (if relevant) after signing an NDA. Public research data generated will
be made openly accessible via the online repository ZENODO, as soon as the research has been published. ZENODO
is a free of charge repository developed by CERN within the EU OpenAIRE project to support Open Data
management for EC funded multi-disciplinary research. In general, the SuRE consortium focuses on ensuring open
access to research data. However, because of the sensitive nature of some data parts, in certain cases, these parts may
remain confidential and not be accessible to third parties.

1.2.5 Research data management and management of other research outputs

All SuRE data storage will be in line with General Data Protection Regulation 2016/679 and The Consortium
Agreement will cover all aspects of data and data management. Individual partners will curate their data, as overseen
by the coordinator. Partners decide whether data storage is local or in the cloud. Green archiving for confidential
information will be used for commercially and/or technologically sensitive information, with measures for eventual
access after protection or declassification. SuRE will develop a project data management plan to handle data for
exploitation and (in the case of non-confidential data) dissemination. The data management plan, deliverable D8.2,
will outline principles and processes for data collection, organisation, management, storage, security, analysis and
sharing. A first draft will be ready by M6 and will be updated periodically during the project. Data storage in
appropriate repositories (e.g., Zenodo) will ensure data viability after the project completion. Restrictions to data
access will comply with the IPR standards set by the consortium as well as Horizon Europe principles on open access
research (as open as possible and as closed as necessary). Ensuring competitiveness and enhancing market potential
of the products and processes developed in SuRE may require restrictions to data. IFE will oversee the process to
guarantee that both dissemination and exploitation comply with the conditions defined in the Grant Agreement.

Do no significant harm
SuRE methodology complies with Article 17 of EU Regulation No 2020/852 ("do no significant harm") because we
treat advances through co-optimization of economic and life-cycle environmental parameters; improved water quality
and biodiversity; decreased material use; and increased recyclability. This working lens ensures coordinated positive
movements towards all 6 environmental objectives: Climate change mitigation; Climate change adaptation; The
sustainable use and protection of water and marine resources; The transition to a circular economy; Pollution
prevention and control; and The protection and restoration of biodiversity and ecosystems.

#žCON-MET-CMž# #žCOM-PLE-CPž# #žREL-EVA-REž#

                                                            Part B - Page 17 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                    EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

2  Impact #@IMP-ACT-IA@#

In this Chapter, we will show which Outcomes and Impacts the actions in SuRE will lead to. We will also detail the
plans for the dissemination, exploitation and communication of the results which will enable the realization of these
Outcomes and Impacts. A short summary of the most important long-term Impacts from SuRE follows below.

   1. Reduced cost and improved efficiency of sustainable RE and their associated value chains. The deployment
      of FPV in Europe will accelerate, as investors and project developers will have a better understanding of risk
      mitigation and electricity yield forecast, and an improved business case through improved FPV designs and
      reduced LCOE.

   2. Increase knowledge on the environmental impacts, and enhance sustainability, of RE technologies along their
      lifetime and value chains. The further deployment of FPV in Europe will be implemented with a substantial
      higher level of circularity and a substantial lower risk for the environment.

   3. Input to policy making generate enhanced security and autonomy of energy supply in EU, while accelerating
      the green transition. The potential area available for FPV deployment in Europe will substantially increase as
      permitting authorities better understand the conditions when they can and cannot issue permits. The competitive
      advantages of the European FPV value chain are strengthened, reducing dependency on imported components.

2.1 Project's pathways towards impact
The consortium has identified 5 important Target Groups to maximize the impact of the results from SuRE. More
information on each of these groups are described in the Table below. The Target Groups are used to identify who
will benefit from the Outcomes and Impacts (in Section 2.1), and who SuRE needs to communicate with to achieve
the Outcomes and Impacts (in Section 2.3).

   TARGET GROUP                                             SEGMENTS                        FOCUS

   1. Main end-users      Ě Utility companies               Ě Consultancies                 HIGH
                          Ě Investors                       Ě Engineering companies

   Includes main off takers of the FPV technology developed within the project. SuRE engages with this target

   group to i) Ensure that the developments reach a large market beyond the off takers within the consortium, ii)

   Contribute to expanding the FPV market, iii) Reduce investor hesitancy from uncertainty

   2. FPV industry        Ě FPV technology providers        Ě Materials & Component         HIGH
                          Ě Asset managers                      suppliers (incl. software)
                          Ě Certification bodies

   Includes the premise suppliers and the broader FPV industry. SuRE engages with the wider FPV industry to i)

   Ensure that whole FPV industry can make use of established best-practices and openly available results from

   SuRE, ii) Increase the availability of materials and components with the required quality and sustainability,

   important for scale-ups and further improvements in sustainability and cost-efficiency along the value chain.

   3. Public authorities  Ě Policy makers                   Ě European Commission           HIGH

                          Ě Concession granting bodies Ě Regulators

   Includes entities responsible for setting rules and incentives for designing and implementing FPV power plants,

   and strengthening Europe's energy autonomy, human capital, and competitiveness. SuRE engages with public

   authorities to improve the knowledge base needed for regulations and legislation for FPV deployment. Access to

   scientific knowledge and best-practices is key to ensure sustainable, safe, and cost-efficient deployment of FPV.

   4. Scientific Com.     Ě Energy and power systems Ě Marine technology                    MEDIUM

                          Ě Environmental Sciences          Ě Materials technology

   FPV is highly interdisciplinary in nature, and SuRE will interact with a broad scientific community to; i) ensure

   that the open results from SuRE can and will be utilized to further deepen the understanding of various aspects of

   FPV and enable further improvements in FPV technology and deployment practices, ii) ensure that the consortium

   has access to the relevant, new and updated knowledge from within the field of FPV and from other disciplines.

   5. General Public      Ě General public                                                  MEDIUM

   SuRE encourages a common understanding and trust in the positive impact of increased production of RE

   technology, and deployment of RE in Europe. Highly accessible content is produced to engage with the society.

                                                            Part B - Page 18 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                    EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

2.1.1 Contribution of SuRE towards the Impact specified in the Destination and Outcomes of the Topic
SuRE will contribute substantially and uniquely to all expected outcomes of the call, and to five of the Impacts of
the wider destination theme "Global leadership in RE".

 Impact 1: Reduced cost and improved efficiency of sustainable RE and their value chains
 Outcome 1: New FPV designs that reduce CAPEX and OPEX, maximize energy output and reduce LCOE.

 In SuRE three leading European FPV suppliers will develop and verify new designs of different components of
 their FPV technologies. Choices and changes in component design will be guided by new predictive yield models
 with higher accuracy than what is currently available. Tabular forms of these results will be presented, enabling
 the gained knowledge to be beneficial also for deployment of other FPV technologies. The calculations will be
 performed for different scales and sea states. The models will also be used to optimize maintenance routines and
 reduce costs of O&M for FPV power plants. The advanced module and system concepts developed by CTI and
 ZIM will be demonstrated in FPV power plants > 5 MW. The results from SuRE will also include quantification
 of stressors and suggested alterations to accelerated stress tests for GPV modules according to the changes in
 experienced stress. The direct outcome of this work by the end of the project period is a significant improvement
 in the designs of the three FPV technologies from CTI, ZIM, and Sunlit, reducing both their CAPEX and OPEX,
 while optimizing the energy output. In sum this leads to a significant reduction in LCOE. Specific goals for the
 cost reductions are given as KPIs. In the medium-term, the LCOE reduction will be most prominent for the three
 FPV technology value chains represented in the consortium, but many of the results will be transferable to other
 FPV technologies and will in the longer term contribute to a reduced cost and improved efficiency also for other
 FPV value chains. The potential impact in the longer-term is that FPV will be more cost-competitive compared to
 fossil fuels and land-consuming RE technologies, which can significantly increase the deployment rate.

 The results are linked to HLO 1 in this proposal and will be accomplished through the work in WP2, 3, 4, 5 and
 6. The following KPIs will be efficient measures of the achievement of these goals: 1) Deviations between
 modelled and measured production data for the monitored sites is reduced, indicating increased accuracy in
 predictive yield models, 2) A 10% reduction in LCOE for the new CTI technology, 3) A reduction of 15% in BoS
 costs for Zimmermann's FPV technology, 4) A reduction in LCOE of 60% for Sunlit's FPV technology 5) One
 new, accelerated stress test for FPV modules in a near shore environment suggested. Target groups: 1) main end-
 users, 2) FPV industry, 3) Public authorities, 4) Scientific community, and 5) General Public.
 Impact 2: Enhanced security and autonomy of energy supply in EU, while accelerating the green transition
 Outcome 2: Expand the application of FPV for inland and offshore waters.
 Through SuRE, ZIM will expand their FPV design standards from SSC 3 (WMO SSC: Slight, wave height 0.5 ş
 1.25 m) to SSC 4 (Moderate, wave height 1.25 to 2.5) through optimization and increased structural integrity of
 their steel components, and development of new interconnects and mooring solutions. Sunlit has built pilots up to
 SSC3/4 and aim to validate their design up to SSC 5. The design modifications of all three FPV designs will enable
 them to expand the application of their technologies to water bodies with higher SSCs and higher salinity.

 The results are linked to HLO 2 in this proposal and will be accomplished through the work in WP2, 4, 5 and 6.
 KPIs: 1) New design standard for ZIM Float for SSC 4. 2) Validation of Sunlit technology for SSC 5. 3) New
 accelerated stress tests specifically designed for FPV developed addressing three key stressors. 4) Publication and
 revision of pre-normative procedures. Adoption of procedures by FPV producers and installers. Target groups:
 1) Main end-users, 2) FPV industry, 3) Public authorities, 4) Scientific community, and 5) General Public.
 Impact 3: Enhanced sustainability of renewable energy value chains, taking fully into account circular
 economy, social, economic and environmental aspects in line with European Green Deal priorities.

 In SuRE, enhanced sustainability of RE value chains will be adressed primarily through reduced carbon footprints
 of FPV power plants due to reduced material consumption (reductions in HDPE, Steel, and Alumium usage,
 respectively), use of more recycled materials (post-industrial HDPE to post-consumer HDPE or PP, as well as
 recycled aluminum), and focus on deployment that has a positive impact on the local environment.

 The results are linked to HLO3 in this proposal and will be accomplished through the work in WP1, 3, 4, 5 and
 6. KPIs: 1) Reduced carbon footprint for ZIM Float by 20% 2) Documented, reduced carbon footprint for CTI
 technology 3) 50% reduction in Al consumption for Sunlit, models for using recycled Al. 4) The KPIs for Impact
 1 and Outcome 1 are also relevant for Impact 3. The Target groups: 1) Main end-users, 2) FPV industry, 3) Public
 authorities, 4) Scientific community, and 5) General Public.
 Impact 4: More effective market uptake of RE to support commercialization & provide input to policy making.

                                                            Part B - Page 19 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                    EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

SuRE aims to reduce the observed hesitance to enter and/or invest in FPV and to increase societal acceptance of
FPV. The consortium has identified uncertainty as a hindrance for greater market uptake of FPV. There is
uncertainty related to sustainability, lifetime, and yield for FPV power plants. SuRE address all these three aspects
in the generalized WPs with the aim of making more knowledge publicly available for industry stakeholders.
SuRE, through substantial effort in WP7, also has a strong commitment to communicate with European citizens
and policy makers. The results related to sustainability are considered to be of special relevance for a broad
audience.
The results are linked to HLO4 in this proposal and will be accomplished through the work in WP1, 2, 3, and 7.
KPIs: 1) Facilitate communication between public and FPV providers through artistic platforms 2) Streamline
LCOE calculations to accelerate investment process. 3) Paper detailing inputs of EYA for FPV in PVsyst. 4)
Publication of sensitivity of FPV plant decisions on LCOE. Target groups: 1) Main end-users, 2) FPV industry,
3) Public authorities, 4) Scientific community, and 5) GP.
Impact 5: Increase knowledge on the environmental impacts of RE techs along their lifetime and value chains.
Outcome 3: Minimize the environmental impact of FPV technology for inland and offshore waters.
A result from SuRE will be a set of guidelines including relevant parameters, methods for monitoring, and
reference values, to assess the direct impact of FPV on aquatic systems and biodiversity. The impact of FPV on
ecosystem biodiversity will be quantified, and optimizations and mitigation measures will be investigated to
further reduce negative impact and enhance positive impact on the environment. These results will enable policy
makers and concession granting bodies a solid scientific foundation for regulating FPV deployment, do proper and
efficient permitting, and expand application of FPV while minimizing any negative environmental impact and
maximizing the potential positive impacts on local environment and biodiversity.
These results from SuRE are linked primarily with HLO3 and will be accomplished through the work in WP1, 4,
5, and 6. KPIs: 1) Protocol for measuring hydrological and ambient variables to model the interaction of FPV
with waterbodies, 2) Published results on biodiversity mitigation measures, and on effect of coverage ratios for
European waterbody types, 3) Internally agreed pre-normative procedures for assessing FPV sustainability form
basis of published guidelines for sustainability monitoring of FPV power plants. Target groups: 1) Main end-
users, 2) FPV industry, 3) Public authorities, 4) Scientific community, and 5) GP.

2.1.2 The Key Impact Pathways

 Scientific Impact             Creating high-quality knowledge

In SURE the four leading research institutes on FPV in Europe is collaborating with the leading FPV technology
providers to push the forefront of FPV science and technology. FPV is a relatively new technology, and access to
high quality scientific literature based on field data and monitoring is very scarce. There is a great need for more
accessible, openly available and high-quality scientific, and popular scientific, literature. In SuRE the research
partners will analyse production and monitoring data from a number of commercial FPV sites. We expect that
much of this information can and will be shared in peer reviewed publications and will have a huge impact on the
knowledge base for FPV. The publishing work will predominantly be carried out in WP1, 2 and 3. List of papers
with preliminary titles is provided in the Dissemination Plan in Section 2.2.
Indicator:Number of peer-reviewed papers & conference proc. 9 peer-reviewed + 4 conference proceedings

                                            Strengthening human capital in R&I

With the tremendous upscaling of RE deployment, there is a lack of skilled personell in the business. Technical
careers and education in solar jobs must be promoted as a matter of priority to solve the sector's issue of lacking
skilled labor. In SuRE, one PhD student (Deltares/Utrecht University) is fully funded by the project, 4 PhD
students are associated with the project and 12 Master's students will be educated (University of Freiburg,
University of Oslo and Utrecth University). Fraunhofer regularly offers workshops and training for the FPV
industry. This will be an excellent platform to disseminate the results from FPV to ensure uptake of updated
knowledge. Through the project, the topic of FPV will be introduced at the University of Oslo (UiO) through the
courses TEK5330 and TEK9330. The course is taught by personell from IFE and is currently covering general
aspects of PV systems, including BIPV, but not yet FPV. A 3-hour lecture on FPV will be developed and included
in the course. The course reaches 15-20 students per year. The lecture material will be developed; the lectures
will continue after the project's end. Fraunhofer will introduce FPV to the Solar Energy module in the Sustainable
Systems Engineering Course at University of Freiburg. Lector Miguel Dionsio Pires from AERES University of
Applied Science is part of the Deltares-SuRE team. In his course `Innovations in monitoring water quality' at
AERES he will disseminate the results of SuRe in his yearly courses on water quality. Through SuRE he will

                                                            Part B - Page 20 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                    EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

engage several students in fieldwork and research projects on FPV and 20 students a year at AERES will be

educated on the environmental impact of FPV. SuRE will host an annual FPV summer school for 20 students.

Funds are also allocated in SuRE to enable researcher upskilling and mobility among research partners and

industry for visits. This will contribute to broadening the knowledge of the researchers on exchange, and build

strong, long-term interaction between the partners in the consortium. The monitored large scale pilots and utility

sites give the researchers partners access to unique infrastructure.

Indicator: Number of researchers having benefitted from 1/4 full/associated PhD students, 12

upskilling activities in project (through training, mobility, and masterstudents + 150 students (over 5 years),

access to infrastructures)                                  20 students on summer school, access to unique

                                                            infrastructure ~ 20 researchers, mobility ~ 2

                            Fostering diffusion of knowledge and Open Science

In several of the market segments covered by the SuRE projects, companies in direct competion (CTI/ZIM/Sunlit,

BayWa/LKY) collaborates in the belief that collaboration foster mutual benefits; for the individual companies

and for society through safer and more rapid deployment of FPV. The companies have found common grounds

to collaborate on generic topics relevant for the whole FPV industry; sustainable deployment and a sustainable

value chain, development of reliability test procedures and standards for FPV components and development of

accurate models and tools for EYA of FPV power plants.

Indicator: Share of Funded Project (FP) research outputs (open All publications in open access,

data/ publication/ software etc.) shared through open recommondations for commercial softwares for

knowledge infrastructures (open access)                     FPV and environmental guidelines

 Societal Impact            EU policy priorities and global challenges through SDGs and R&I

SuRE is strategically oriented to adress EU policy priorities and global challenges. Below is a summary of how

SuRE will contribute to goals and indicators in central policy documents and SDGs.

          7.1 and 7.2. SuRE provides new avenues for RE, whose source is cost-competitive and

          environmentally beneficial. 7.b. Near-shore FPV is an ideal electricity source for small island

          developing States.

          8.2. The core of SuRE is to bring out the potential of FPV as a sustainable, renewable, and labor-
          intensive energy source through technological upgrading and innovation.

          12.5. Through the materials suppliers and technology providers, developments in SuRE are tied to
          recyclability, reduced waste, and end-of-life materials recovery.

Green Deal, RePower EU, EU Solar Energy Strategy: As PV implementation expands, issues related to land

access are increasing, and FPV is a promising solution to reach the RePower EU targets for PV in a sustainable

manner, without sacrificing local environmental concerns or conflict with other use of land. A main outcome for

SuRE is to increase the deployment rate of FPV, in Europe and gloablly.

Indicator: Number and share of outputs aimed at addressing 100%: All the specific objectives of SuRE, and

specific EU policy priorities (including meeting SDGs)      each of the 11 innovations (Table 1.1.3),

                                                            contribute to specific EU policy priorites.

                   Strengthening the uptake of research and innovation in society

Our approach to strengthen the market uptake is to reduce uncertainties and thereby reduce hesitancy of investing

in FPV power plants, and to contribute to disseminate knowledge to a broad audience to reduce conflict, and

thereby accelerate FPV. Reduced uncertainty includes improved accuracy of EYA and streamlined LCOE

calculations. To reduce conflict, we seek to foster multilateral dialogue among residents, permitting bodies,

research teams, FPV industry. WP7 Communication and Dissemination integrates the FPV piloting processes

with public engagement through art. The WP leader, Compßz, combines their vision for both art and PV to

maximize uptake of new technology by ensuring FPV suits both producers and consumers.

Indicator: Number and share of Funded Projects where EU Citizens and endu-users contribute to the co-

citizens and end-users contribute to the co-creation of R&I creation of R&I in SuRE. The relevant tasks

content.                                                    will be carried out in WP3 and WP7

 Technolo cal/econom c Impact  Generating innovation-based growth

                                                            Part B - Page 21 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                    EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

The SuRE consortium provides a uniqe arena for innovation-based growth in the European FPV industry. Projects

where firms are attempting to forge new ties in new collaborative R&D efforts and make R&D strategies that are

more accessible to other researchers and firms, are more likely to successfully diffuse and exploit the knowledge

generated by the project. Projects with such attributes are more likely to yield economic benefits, all other things

being equal, that extend beyond the firm directly engaged in the project. In SuRE the leading companies within

FPV in Europe are working together to enforce the world leading competence and position of the European FPV

industry and increase the deployment rate of European FPV technology, in Europe and globally. Through SuRE

a number of innovative products, processes and methods will be developed, exploited by the partners in the

consortium and efficienty communicated to the wide FPV industry, governance and public. The list of new

producs, processes and methods developed in SuRE is provided in Table 1.1.3.

Indicator: Number of innovative products, processes, or 5 new products, 2 new processes, 4 new

methods from FP & Intellectual Property Rights applications methods. See Table 1.1.3 for details.

                                       Creating more and better jobs

New solar power generation capacities are highly cost-competitive, but yet the most job-intensive among low

carbon and RE technologies. PV creates about 6 jobs per MW of capacity in manufacturing, construction, and

installation and 1.2 - 4.8 in operating and maintenance23, which means 7 to 11 FTEs/MW deployed. As a

significant fraction will be employed within production of cells and modules, we will assume that only 10% of

the FTEs/MW is employed within the part of the value chain covered by BayWa/ZIM and CTI/LKY, i.e., 1

FTE/MW. Sunlit covers a smaller and less labor-intensive part of the value chain than CTI/LKY and ZIM/BayWa

as they do not deploy the systems. Market predictions for FPV vary greatly, also indicating the sensitivity to cost

predictions for FPV, but an increase of 25% annually is in the middle of the span of the predictions, and the

needed annual growth rate of PV if we are to meet zero emission in 2050. However, these predictions are highly

uncertain. The combined results of LCOE reductions, increased application offshore, and reduced uncertainty

related to permitting and sustainability-concerns, all outcomes of SuRE, will lead to a more rapid market growth

than the benchmark scenario of 25%. ZIM/BayWa's SuREştarget is to reduce BoS cost with 15%, translating

into a ~ 5% reduction in LCOE. Combining the LCOE reductions with the plans for enhanced sustainability,

dissemination and exploitation, CTI estimates that their developments in SuRE will increase their market share

to 20% by 2028. Sunlit plans to have an establish production-line of 11 MW by mid-2024, and an upscaling to

455 MW by the end of 2026. FTEs in production of other components and related value chains not included in

these estimates. The estimates only look at additional MW and FTEs beyond the benchmark 25% market growth.

Current    Target Target                                    Annual Additional Installed Additional FTEs

market share LCOE market share growth 2026 2030 (MW) 2026                                          2030

ZIM 7%     5% 12% (2030) ~ 40% 40                                                   300  ~ 40 ~ 300

CTI 15%    10% 20% (2028) ~ 35% 150                                                 300  ~ 150 ~ 300

Sunlit NA  60% 7,5% (2026) ~ 75% 445                                                550  ~ 50 ~ 60

Indicator: Number of FTE jobs created, and jobs maintained in  FTEs working in SuRE: ~20 FTEs/year.
beneficiary entities for the FP project.                       Additional FTEs within the consortium:
                                                               by 2026 - 240, by 2030 ş 660.

Leveraging investment in research and innovation

Ě To fully exploit the developments carried out in SuRE CTI must invest an estimated 2M in new production

tools to produce and assemble the targeted 600 MW capacity.

Ě Two 5 MW pilots will be installed during SuRE. The external investments related to the pilots will surpass

5 M each.

Ě With the aid of the cost reductions in SuRE, Sunlit plans to increase the production to 455 MW/year. This

goal will require a 23 M investment in production facilities and automation. A 105-kW pilot will be

realized during the project period, with a value of ~ 150 k. Financed outside of SuRE.

Indicator: Amount of public & private investment mobilized to Production lines: 2 + 23 M = 25 M. Pilots:

exploit and scale-up the SuRE results                          12 M, SuRE leverage=1,2 M. Total = 38 M

2.1.3 Requirements and potential barriers to outcomes and impact
Table 2.1 lists potential barriers arising from factors beyond the scope and duration of the SuRE that may influence
whether we are able to achieve the planned outcomes and impacts.

                                                            Part B - Page 22 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                    EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

Table 2.1 Potential BarriersRisk of                            How SuRE will address the barriers
   technology                            Close collaboration between industrial actors and research organizations
          Potential Barriersdevelopment  along all stages of development facilitates efficient innovation. Tight follow-
           Technology development        up, support and help to develop realistic progress plans for the developers are
           is a high-risk activity, andPolicycrucial, with particular emphasis at the decision gates.
           the success rate can be       SuRE will be governed by a proper partnership agreement, which will smooth
           low.Publi cacceptance         this barrier and will outline the necessary fine balance between conflicting
           Industrial secrecy may        interests.
           impact results and uptakeMarketCurrently, there is little high-quality, quantitative research available to base
           beyond the project.           policies on, and many of the models published has not been verified with
           Pre-mature policy             field data. Through SuRE, the leading international research institutes within
           decisions leading to FPV      FPV will access unprecedented amounts of field data from utility scale FPV
           regulations based on          sites. SuRE will make quantitative knowledge and verified models available
           precaution instead of         as a basis for new policies. This is a prerequisite, but no guarantee for sound
           scientific data               regulations. SuRE plan strategic dialogue with the relevant stakeholders to
                                         improve the dissemination, understanding and uptake of the research results.
           Negative media attention      Massive deployment of RE can easily lead to conflicting opinions on land
           resulting in increased        use. Our guidelines on sustainability will be of high value to reduce the risk
           public opposition towards     of unsustainable deployment and public opposition. Our dissemination and
           FPV power plants              communication plan will be the main tool both to share the results and
                                         facilitate sustainable installations, but also to communicate information in an
           LCOE of competitive           accessible manner to a wider public.
           technologies is reduced       The main strategy of SuRE is to contribute to fulfill the potential for cost
           more rapidly than FPV         reductions within FPV. PV is an industry with extreme cost reductions and
           resulting in lower market     learning curves. FPV is a relatively new application within PV, and the
           shares                        consortium evaluates the potential for cost reductions to be large. Even with
                                         modest cost reductions, FPV have competitive benefits in market with land
           The future market for         scarcity and a great potential for shared infrastructure.
           FPV is smaller than           SuRE address what we consider the two main concerns for the continuous
           foreseen                      growth of FPV deployment; cost and sustainability & permitting.

2.1.4 Scale and significance of the project's contribution to outcomes and impacts

The International Energy Agency (IEA) reported that for the world to reach the goal of net zero emissions by 2050

there will have to be an annual average solar energy generation growth of 25%1. In 2020, solar generation increased

22%, resulting in the IEA categorizing solar photovoltaics (PV) as 'more effort needed' 24. FPV is a clear addition to

the PV industry, adding to overall growth while avoiding increasing competition with land use. To do FPV correctly,

however, requires the broad view of SuRE. The SuRE Consortium is capable of making a remarkable impact on

the LCOE of FPV power plants. Frequently hailed as the third pillar of the global PV market, FPV are gaining

traction around the world The total installed capacity has surpassed 3 GW and the annual installed capacity of FPV

is currently around 1 GW. The cost of FPV varies substantially, depending on market and local conditions, but

assuming a cost of 1.5 /W, the current value of the annual FPV

market is around 1.5 billion. However, the variation in the           Realizing the 5-10% LCOE reductions
estimates of growth and future market shares for FPV is striking.     targeted in SuRE will make FPV more cost
Published estimates of the annual CAGR varies from 5% to              competitive and more likely to reach the high
43%25. If we assume a value of 1.5 billion in 2021 and a 25%          market growth scenarios. By 2030, the
linear growth rate, the global, annual FPV market will reach 6 GW     difference in deployment resulting from an
of annual installed capacity and 9 billion in 2030. Significantly     annual growth rate of 20% versus an annual
higher estimates also exist, such as from a USA government report     growth rate of 30% will be more than 10 GW.
of $27.7 billion by the end of 203126. The great variation in

predicted market size and growth rates also indicate the sensitivity

of the growth to cost predictions for FPV. Analysis shows that FPV currently is 12-20% more expensive than

GPV27,28, and the rate of cost reductions will significantly influence the market size.

                                                            Part B - Page 23 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                    EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

The uncertainty of the predictions highlights the sensitivity of FPV deployment with respect to future costs and
policies. Sensitivity analysis shows that installed FPV system cost is most sensitive to float costs and module
efficiency, followed by local loads28. Depending on system size, the structural balance of system (SBoS) cost
constitutes 25% ş30% of the total CAPEX. SuRE targets all the most critical parameters to reduce LCOE. The
main technology developments in SuRE are directed towards reducing SBoS costs. In addition, we address
optimization of module cost versus efficiency for FPV applications, and more accurate predictions of loads to reduce
overengineering. For the business analysis carried out for this proposal, the consortium has predicted an annual
growth rate of 25% as a benchmark scenario. The partners have analyzed how they expect the developments in SuRE
to impact their growth beyond that of only following the market, as shown in Section 2.1.2. under "creating more
and better jobs". We have not attempted to evaluate how SuRE can impact the growth of the total market for SuRE,
although given the capacities, cost reduction and sustainability goals of the partners, it is highly likely that SuRE will
not only increase the market shares of the partners, but also increase the deployment rate of FPV and expand the
global market. Through competitive advantages related to LCOE, sustainability and synergies in exploitation, which
will be realized through SuRE, all partners target a growth that is significantly greater than the benchmark market
growth of 25%.

SuRE will enable the further deployment of FPV in Europe will be implemented with a substantially higher level
of circularity and a substantial lower risk for the environment. Despite the potential, European countries have been
slow to embrace FPV. The dominating market has been Asia. This is partly due to a lack of empirical data, but mostly
due to the specific conditions that must be met ş in terms of design, materials, system components, operation, and
environmental impact ş when working with bodies of water29. Long-term environmental sustainability is a vital
requirement that FPV plants must fulfill if they are going to be approved for use in many European markets. The lack
of knowledge on sustainability also infers that economic analysis lacks the full value proposition of FPV systems in
detail because lifetime analysis of cost and revenues encompassing the impact of the energy-water-nexus is required
to understand the complete economic feasibility of FPV applications28. SuRE is ambitious with respect to providing
accurate and validated models for the impact of FPV on biodiversity and the local environment. The knowledge will
be made available through accessible guidelines, directly helping the public authorities and regulatory bodies to make
decisions based on high-quality data. Decreased costs, reduced uncertainties, and improved sustainability of the FPV
systems, as achieved through SuRE are the factors needed for more rapid deployment in Europe. The potential is
immense. In addition, the production capacity for both MetSolar, CTI, ZIM and Sunlit will be greatly enhanced, and
CTI, MetSolar and Sunlit all plan new production lines to exploit the results in SuRE. The current module production
capacity in Europe is limited, and additional production capacity is another important factor to enhance the security
and autonomy of energy supply in Euorpe.

2.2 Measures to maximize impact - Dissemination, exploitation and communication #@COM-DIS-VIS-CDV@#

SuRE will apply an impact-driven dissemination, exploitation and communication strategy consisting of three phases,
designed to maximize the potential short-term outcomes and long-term impacts of the project and the wide scale roll-
out of Key Exploitable Results (KERs). Compaz will be responsible for dissemination and communication, and a
detailed Communication and Dissemination Plan (CDP) provided by M6 of the project (D7.1). The exploitation plan,
provided by M12 (Exploitation Plan ş D7.2) will have it's outspring from the Partners individual exploitation plans,
but with joint consortium efforts to
leverage the individual plans and
collaborate for increased impact
and uptake.

2.2.1 Dissemination strategy
         and measures

All partners, under coordination of
IFE, will steer selection,
elaboration, and creation of
materials for dissemination.
Compaz and IFE will collaborate
closely with organizations that
provide established and recognized
channels for dissemination,
including IEA PVPS, Solar Power

                                                            Part B - Page 24 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                    EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

Europe and national clusters. The research partners will contribute to dedicated FPV workshops for industry and
policy makers. Through collaboration with three universities (University of Oslo,University of Freiburg, Utrecht
University) the research partners will engage in education and capacity building activites. Open access scientific
publications, oral presentations and invited talks at conferences and industrial events will be used to share non-
sensitive information to the FPV industry and research community.

The CDP will be developed that combine the Communication (Section 2.2.5) and Dissemination activies.

                                        Dissemination Plan                                   Target groups
Activity                                                                                     Main end-users
Events (Workshops, Webinars, Conferences, Fairs)
Host 2 events with international profile targeting main end-users. Objectives are: (1) to    FPV Industry
disseminate project results and project directions, (2) calibrate against decision
frameworks of these actors.                                                                  Public authorities
Host 2 events with international profile targeting actors in the FPV industry. One is
targeted to be co-organized with the Intersolar Exhibition in Munich. The other is           Main end-users, FPV
targeted to be co-organized with the SolarPlaza FPV conference                               Industry, Public
Host 4 workshops targeted at public (permitting) authorities. We will invite water           authorities
authorities and other permitting authorirties such as provinces. Events will be organized
in The Netherlands, Germany, France and Norway (where contacts and communication             Scientific community
chanels are established).
Participation in 15 conferences and trade fairs. Objectives are: (1) interact actively with  Scientific community,
multiple stakeholders simultaneously, covering the European and international range. (2)     End-users, FPV
The consortium showcases results achieved by the project through presentations, talks,       Industry
exhibition spaces and personal engagement. Selected fairs and Industry conferences:
Europe Solar Summit, Floating Solar Conference, Intersolar                                   Public authorities
10 oral presentation at Scientific conferences. Selected scientific conferences we will
attend: EUPVSEC, Sophia reliability workshop, NREL reliability workshop.                     Main end-users, FPV
Publications (Peer-reviewed articles and conference proceedings)                             Industry, Public
9 peer-reviewed articles in addition to conference proceedings. Selected journals for        authorities, Scientfic
publication are: Solar Energy, IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, Renewable Energy,              Community, Public.
EUPVSEC proceedings. Planned papers: 1) Modelling of FPV-water interaction and               Scientific community,
biodiversity, 2) Monitoring of water quality, 3) LCA of FPV Systems, 4) Field stressors      Main end-users, FPV
for FPV, 5) Accelerated stress testing for FPV, 6) Operating temperature of FPV              Industry, Public
technologies, 7) Review and summary of WIML for tabulated sea states, 8) Review of
soiling losses for FPV, 9) PLR for Utility Scale FPV power plants.
1 White Paper expressly oriented to policymakers on the deployment of FPV. The
publication outlines best practices, suggesting lessons learnt and measures to overcome
obstacles. This document is designed to be easy-to-digest, short and straight to policy
recommendations.
20 Awareness Publications. The project releases and contributes to over 20 publications
in articles, blog posts, position papers, factsheets, and other non-scientific publications
to reach a critical mass, targeting a less specialised public. Reference media: CORDIS
Research*EU Magazine, AI-on-demand Web CafÚs.
Open Access Research
SuRE facilitates an online repository to manage and publish material with different
access permissions, including peer-reviewed publications and shareable scientific
research data. The project relies on Zenodo, part of the European Open Science Cloud
(EOSC), to deposit both publications and datasets. The use of Open Research Europe is
encouraged as open access publishing platform for scientific articles among the
consortium, without author fees and open access-compliance. Whenever possible, the
datasets are made openly available via the data.europa.eu, the official portal for EU data.

2.2.2 Exploitation Strategy and measures

SuRE will make a strong effort and thus has dedicated activities to develop a business framework and market analysis
leading to the exploitation and further implementation. All partners will be directly involved in these activities

                                                            Part B - Page 25 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                    EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

bringing relevant options for market uptake. The role each partner plays in this strategy is different according to its
nature. Exploitation activities will be carried out primarily in the individual companies, supervised by the project
coordinator. WP7 will create effective measures for preparing the market uptake of the results, while the individual
WPs deals with the development of the solutions themselves. The solutions will reach TRL6-7, thus, European
regulations and directives will be fulfilled for the pilots, shortening market uptake. The SuRE consortium has defined
an overall exploitation strategy describing how we will work to ensure that usable knowledge to be generated during
the project, based on the three main steps below.

 Results Identification: Identification and definition of the key exploitable results (KER) of the project. This step
    also includes the identification of the level of interest in the different results and the identification of the added
    value of the project to boost further scientific and exploitation developments.

 Individual Partners' Exploitation Strategy: Definition of the partners' exploitation plans, including the market
    potential, the added value, the target end-users, the potential competitors, the expected impact on the partners'
    portfolio, a tentative timetable and the opportunities and barriers for the exploitation action.

 Consortium level Exploitation Strategy: Definition of common exploitation plan, based on a combination of the
    Individual Partners' Plans according to clustering criteria, including similar or common exploitation actions
    declared by the partners in their individual plans; the application domains considered for the exploitation; a
    consideration on the benefit expected from each exploitation actions.

Carrying out the exploitation strategy will lead to a concrete a periodically updated exploitation plan. This will
facilitate the identification of new business opportunities and associated business models throughout the project. To
identify KERs and select which results to pursue, feasibility studies to analyze the technical, financial, commercial
and organizational feasibility of the proposed product will be useful. In SuRE, the main innovations and identified
KERs are related to development of FPV technology. In the following, a preliminary feasibility study and business
plan focused on FPV floater technology is provided.

2.2.2.1 Feasibility Study

Technical Feasibility. In Table 1.1.2, Section 1.1.2, 1.13 and 1.2 the technical feasibility of the planned innovations,
the challenges and methods used to overcome them are thoroughly described.

Financial Feasibility. For the purpose and duration of SuRE, all partners have the capital needed to fulfil their
obligations and leverage as tabulated in the budget. Sunlit will need investors to realize the planned ramp up of the
production line in Norway. For this purpose, the Innovation Fund is a very relevant sources for funding. The next
deadline for small investments in the Innovation Fund is fall 2023 fits well with Sunlit's first upscaling. For the
technology developments planned in SuRE for CTI and Sunlit SuRE, funding for up-scaling will be required at a
later stage (~2025-2026). Sunlit has significant experience with capital-raising and already has a network of
subcontractors with capacity to deliver equipment for up-scaling. For the duration of the SuRE project the CTI and
LKY have the necessary capital to realize the plans, including technology developments, the first production and
pilots. For up-scaling, the production of the new technology, it will be necessary with capital raising. The Innovation
Fund is one of several potential sources for this funding. It may also be that subcontracting and renting will be the
best option, depending on available interest rates and conditions. BayWa, ZIM, SABIC, Metsolar and Compaz, have
the necessary capital and infrastructure to realize the plans in SURE, including technology developments and pilot.
For larger scale implementation and production of modules designed for FPV applications, MetSolar may require
capital to invest in new tools and/or upscaling. Needs for further investments will depend on the results from SuRE.

Market Feasibility. The market potential for cost-competitive, and sustainable FPV technologies is immense and
growing. We need to keep increasing the deployment rate of PV for many years to come if we are to meet average
EU policy goals1. And as PV implementation expands FPV provides a vast potential of increased deployment without
conflicting with other uses of land. Published estimates of the annual CAGR varies from 5% to 43%25. FPV is also
predicted to be the segment of PV Market to grow at the highest CAGR from 2020 to 2025. A more thorough analysis
of the market and market shares of the partners is provided in Section 2.1.4.

Organizational Feasibility. The partners and value chains are extremely well positioned to manage the extensive,
foreseen growth. The technical knowledge, business insight, and value chains of CTI and ZIM already are world
leading. Concrete plans for upscaling will be revised in the beginning of the project period. Sunlit has is currently
working to scale up a very promising, patented technology and do their first scale up and investments in new
production line with capacity 11 MW/year by early 2024. The founders of the company have many years of
experience from the FPV business and from other start-ups prior to founding Sunlit. They will also benefit
significantly from the deep knowledge of the FPV industry in the SuRE consortium.

                                                            Part B - Page 26 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                            EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

2.2.2.2 Preliminary Business Plan
Business models are the main instrument to support the exploitation of SuRE's results. A business model creates
value for companies by identifying how to convert their products into profit. At the proposal level the Consortium
has decided to make use of the CANVAS model as a key strategic management tool allowing the description of a
preliminary Business Plan for the three FPV technology providers and value chains. This will be further used,
individualized, and improved as SuRE progresses. The Business Model Canvas (BMC) explains a business model
graphically, by dividing it into 9 basic modules that reflect the logic that a company follows to raise revenue, covering
the 4 main business areas: customers, value proposition offered, infrastructure and economic viability ş finance. A
first CANVAS model analysis has been performed for SuRE and is shown in Fig. 9.

2.2.2.3 Exploitation Plan

Preliminary Individual partners' exploitation plan
Detailed individual exploitation plans for all partners will be developed within the first six months of the project
period. A preliminary individual exploitation plan with the identified KERs is provided in the table below.

Table 2.5 Partner KERs and preliminary exploitation plans

 CTI KERs: New FPV technology and new product for efficient FPV maintenance.
 CTI will develop a new FPV product to be sold to utility companies and PV developers globally. The product is
 currently at TRL 3 and will be developed to TRL 6 by the end of the project (5 MW pilot will be TRL 5).
 Development will be done with the first off-taker, LKY, the four research institutes and a few central partners
 and subcontractors, one of which is SABIC. Quantified measurements from the 5 MW pilot will be important for
 the exploitation plan. Reports prepared by in SuRE on Sustainability, Reliability and Efficiency of the plant will
 serve as important documentation for new customers. Target groups: Utility companies/ PV developers, Policy
 makers, General public. Main sales channels: CTI sales department.
 ZIM KER: Modified FPV product for new applications.
 ZIM will expand the application area for the FPV technology from SSC 3 to 4. Quantified measurements from the
 pilot will be important means of documenting the enhanced structural integrity to potential customers. Target
 groups: 1) Main end-users, 2) FPV Industry, 3) Policy makers. Main sales channels: existing sales department
 BayWa KERs: Improved business case and extended range of applications for FPV projects.
 A reduced LCOE, higher reliability and higher sustainability of ZIM Float and other potential FPV technologies
 will make FPV more competitive and more appealing. This will be actively used in conversations with waterbody

                                                                              Part B - Page 27 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                    EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

 owners, drinking-water utilities, hydropower operators and public authorities to increase their awareness and to
 boost the likelihood of success of BayWa┤s sales activity, and hence the number and size of projects that can be
 deployed. In addition to BayWa's active participation in dissemination measures in WP7, BayWa will make use
 of direct conference calls, in-person meetings, workshops, and discussions with municipalities and local
 communities, industry conferences and invitation of stakeholders to projects and pilot sites. Target groups: 1)
 Main end users; Utility companies, Energy off-takers, water body owners, Investors. 3) Public authorities. Main
 sales channels: existing sales channels and relationships with investors, off-takers, water body owners. Tenders.
 Sunlit Sea KER: Improved integration of floater and module for FPV application
 Sunlit has developed an FPV based on an aluminum float with a solar panel laminated on top, serially connected
 in a string of floats. In SuRE we improve the product by reducing aluminum usage, strengthening the float to be
 more durable and open for use of recycled aluminum, assessing how the float handles rough sea and wind,
 improving the heat transfer to the water, and piloting proposed changes with sensors in a wave tank. The project
 will enable reduction in LCOE of up to 60% and scaling production from ~11 MW/year in 2024 to ~ 455 MW/year
 by the project end. It will enable certification of the design criteria for the product and thus open new markets for
 Sunlit. Target groups: 1) Main end users; Utility companies/PV developers, Investors 3) Public authorities 5)
 General public. Main sales channels: direct dialogue with main investors and potential customers.
 Metsolar KER: Design of PV module tailored for FPV.
 Metsolar is a custom PV module manufacturer and sees FPV as an application with great potential. The work in
 SuRE will be essential to quantify this potential by evaluating cost-efficiency of potential mitigation measures for
 FPV-specific stressors. MetSolar currently manufactures modules for Sunlit. Sunlit's scale-up plans would make
 them one of MetSolar's largest customers by project end. Cost optimizations and mitigation measures for FPV
 modules in general, and Sunlit's FPV technology, will be focus areas in MetSolar's exploitation plan. Changes to
 MetSolar's production line to allow more cost-efficient modules with larger cell-size is a likely optimization step
 to reduce cost of Sunlit's FPV technology that can also be exploited in MetSolar's other markets. Target groups:
 1) Main end-users; Sunlit, PV industry. Main sales channels: direct dialogue with main investors and customers.
 Sabic KER: New low CO2 processes and products for plastic FPV components.
 Sabic sees that the FPV market has strong growth potential. Sabic wants to achieve via SuRE a strong position to
 offer materials solutions for more sustainable FPV (improved circularity, lower CFP). The exploitation strategy
 of Sabic consists of (1) direct marketing towards FPV system providers, (2) influencing permit criteria by
 disseminating options on improved circularity towards permitting authorities. Target groups: 2) FPV industry.
 Main Sales channels: direct dialogue and development with potential customers.
 IFE, TNO, Fraunhofer KERs: Predictive energy yield models, accelerated stress tests, sustainability guidelines
 SuRE establishes the cooperation of the three leading European institutes in the field of FPV. For IFE, TNO and
 Fraunhofer, SuRE strengthens the partnership with the leading FPV companies in Europe and confirms the strong
 collaboration with SMEs in the field. IFE, TNO and Fraunhofer will gain valuable scientific and technical know-
 how that will allow the institutes to get an even stronger profile in the FPV field. The research institutes will exploit
 the project results through: i) Being the R&D partner for FPV industries; ii) Being the knowledge hub for public
 bodies; iii) Dissemination of results, create follow-up projects for next step innovations, also towards offshore
 FPV.
 Deltares KERs: Sustainability Guidelines, Software
 SuRE strengthen Deltares already leading position as knowledge hub and partner within sustainable deployment
 of FPV. Deltares also have a clear exploitation strategy for their software development, with the `dare to share'
 principle. Deltares distribute Delft3D as 1) open-source code and 2) as a compiled version via a service package.

Joint exploitation plan
The joint exploitation plan will be completed, as a part of the overall exploitation plan, within the first 6 months of
SuRE. SuRE is an ambitious and solutions-oriented project that can bring to market more affordable and sustainable
FPV technologies. The SuRE consortium will make use of the Horizon Results Platform, a system developed by the
European Commission to help promote the exploitation of the results from the R&I framework programmes. Using
this platform will allow the partners to publish and promote uptake of their results towards the key target groups of
SuRE. The key outcomes of will also enter the Horizon Results Booster (HRB), an initiative of the European
Commission whose aim is bringing a continual stream of innovation to the market whilst maximizing the impact of
public funded research within the EU. Through the HRB, SuRE will secure a larger Impact through an extended
Dissemination and Exploitation, heading the research activities towards strong societal impact whilst concretizing
the value of R&I activity for societal challenges.

                                                            Part B - Page 28 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                    EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

2.2.2.4 IPR Strategy
Because SuRE comprises separate value chains of ostensible competitors, but whose common aim is to grow
European FPV activities, it is critical to identify and isolate innovations which need to remain within one entity.
Therefore, ownership and IPR management will allow each partner to innovate while protecting their IPR as set in
the Consortium Agreement. Nonetheless, partners have already achieved a preliminary agreement on the IP strategy
where each partner owns its IP background. The consortium has identified three levels of IP which will be created
from the project: (i) Individual and joint IP, which belongs to individual partners or is jointly owned by partners
working in a particular task and is restricted to those partners; (ii) Generic IP, which can be used by all partners of
the consortium; (iii) Publicly available IP which will be published on the SuRE website and made available with no
restrictions. Provisions for use of IP background will be determined during the commercialization strategy. Insights
that enhance partners' services or enable the launch of new solutions within partners' strategic go-to-market plan will
be kept private and protected via non-registered Soft IP measures (confidential information etc.).

2.2.3 Communication Strategy and Measures
The communication strategy of SuRE involves specific measures to promote the project itself and the results attained,
with the mission to reach a broad audience. We will promote outreach and networking activities by collaborating
with other relevant networks and projects to create joint dissemination activities thus further increasing the project's
outreach. The communication and dissemination analysis also includes engaging and collaborating with our listed
Target Groups as detailed in Section 2.1.1, as input to the concrete measures in the CDP. Common information and
dissemination, sharing upon invitation by CINEA, to used increase the visibility and synergies between Horizon
Europe supported actions. The CDP will be fine-tuned and closely monitored by the advisory board on a yearly basis.

Table 2.5 Method and channel of communication activities

Method         Establish Communication Platforms                                    KPI target
                                                                                    CD analysis shared in
Communication SuRE will analyse internal and external barriers to                   the consortium

and dissemination communicating and disseminating FPV progress. A detailed

analysis       Target Group mapping will be carried out.

Communiction and The communication action plan will be developed at the CDP released

dissemination plan beginning of SuRE (M6), with yearly fine-tuning and close

(CDP)          monitoring by the advisory board.

Logo & Visual  The SuRE identity (logo, graphical chart) will be defined and a      Communication Kit-
identity       Kit of Communication Materials (website, brochure, template,         M6, Website & Social
               flyers, video) will be developed to facilitate the CDP for both      media accounts
Method         virtual and physical engagements of the consortium.                  established in M3
Website        Activities Throughout the Project                                    KPI
               The SuRE website will be the main communication tool to              News ş 1 Item monthly
Social and     present our activities and consortium as a whole. A dedicated        >10 000 unique views
professional   private space for partners will be implemented. All notable and
networking     public progress of SuRE will be published.                           >5000 followers total
               Link SuRE with the professional network of consortium
               partners to share and discuss results, questions and get
               feedback. LinkedIn, Instagram and Twitter willl be used when
               relevant to raise interest in our activities.

Newsletters    The consortium will publish one e-newsletter each year.              1 yearly

Press media    The project coordinator will make press releases validated by        3 yearly
               SuRE partners. Partners are encouraged to contact media
Leaflets and   We will produce visual material to promote SuRE and its              4 leaflet versions; >1000
Posters        activity at fairs, conferences, exhibitions, and other meetings.     reach
Project movie  Compßz will make a movie of around 20 minutes. It will tell          5000 views within 1
documentary    the story of the FPV pilot development.                              year of release

                                                            Part B - Page 29 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

2.3 Summary                                                                                                                                            EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

KEY ELEMENT OF THE IMPACT SECTION                                                                                                    D & E & C MEASURES
                                                                                                          Dissemination measures towards the 5 Target Groups:
             SPECIFIC NEEDS                                            EXPECTED RESULTS                    1) Main end-users and 2) FPV industry; Participation to relevant

 The cost of electricity from FPV                           New products & services:                          industry commercial fairs and tradeshows, leveraging as well on
    power plants must be reduced to                          Novel technology from CTI bringing               meaningful relationship and increase networking activities,
    accelerate the deployment of RE.                                                                          including the European PV Industry Alliance.
                                                               LCOE down by 10%, including new             3) Public authorities; dialogue meetings and white papers
 There is potential to reduce the                              maintenance strategy, is realized and       4) Scientific community; Publications with the results of the planned
    carbon footprint of the current FPV                        verified in 5 MW pilot. Circularity is         activities and tests; Participation at relevant conferences.
    technologies.                                              improved, and CO2 footprint reduced.        5) General Public; See communication measures below.
                                                             Reduced BoS of ZIM Float with 15% and
 Uncertainties in predicted energy                             extended application is realized and       Exploitation of Results from SuRE:
    yield and reliability of FPV power                         verified in 5 MW pilot. Reduced steel       The three FPV value chains, involving the technical departments,
    plants is a hinderance to increased                        consumption and reduced CO2 footprint
    investments.                                               with 20%.                                      and the market and sales departments each of the companies, will
                                                             Sunlit floater with 60% LCOE reduction           carry out the most critical work with respect to exploitation.
 Efficient regulation and permitting of                        is realized and verified in 105 kW pilot.   All companies have efficient, existing channels for sales and
    FPV is hindered by the lack of                           The potential of FPV technologies to             marketing the new and/or improved products.
    quantifiable knowledge on the effect                       positively impact the biodiversity is       Cross-cutting efforts across the value chains and individual partners
    of FPV power plants on the local                           verified and quantified.                       will be vital to exploit the results related to sustainability, reliability
    environment and biodiversity.                            The potential reduction in cleaning costs        and pre-normative standards and modelling tools.
                                                               for FPV power plants is quantified.         An innovation and Commercialization Board (ICB), with one
 Modelling tools to accurately predict                                                                        employee from each partner will be central to maximize the
    LCOE from PV power plants are                           New procedures:                                   exploitation of results towards public authorities and organizations,
    inadequate.                                              Pre-normative standards for accelerated          the scientific community and general public.

 There is not enough skilled labor to                          aging of FPV components.                   Communication towards a wide audience and the general public:
    handle the increased installation rates                  Concrete guidelines on how to evaluate
    required to reach the policy goals for                                                                 Social Media Profiles, visual identity (log), videos and a dedicated
    PV.                                                        the impact of an FPV power plant on the
                                                               local biodiversity.                            website. Organization of a final event open to a wider public to show
 There is a lack of standards to access                      Improved accuracy in EYA, applicable             the outcomes of the project, especially for the FPV industries, the
    the reliability of components for FPV                      for FPV technologies (inland and               scientific community, and policymakers.
    power plants.                                              offshore), implementable in commercial
                                                               bankable tools.

                                                            Part B - Page 30 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                                                       EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

               TARGET GROUPS                                                          OUTCOMES                                                     IMPACTS

  Target Group 1) Main end-users;                           New FPV designs with reduced CAPEX and OPEX,               Economic:
    primary off takers of the technology                    greater energy output and reduced LCOE:
    developments and know-how created in                                                                                Reduced risk and increased competitiveness of FPV
    SuRE. Utility companies, Engineering,                    CTI is ramping up production of new FPV tech. and
    Procurement and Construction                                                                                           power plants, inland and offshore.
    companies and consultancy firms working                     expanding the sales of new technology beyond LKY.
    within the field of FPV. Banks, funds, and                                                                          Deployment of FPV in Europe accelerate as investors
    investors in FPV ş to reduce hesitancy of                ZIM Float has increased expanded their market and
    investing in FPV and reduce interest                                                                                   and project developers have a better understanding of
    rates which greatly affects LCOE.                           increased market shares outside of Europe.                 risk mitigation, predictive energy yield, improved
                                                                                                                           business case through reduced LCOE.
  Target Group 2) FPV Industry.                              Sunlit are ramping up production in Norway.
    Materials and components providers to                    Optimized cleaning routines are picked up by the           An increased market share for European FPV
    the FPV industry will be a target group
    for work related to specifying                              broader FPV industry and transferrable to other            technologies/industry (CTI from 15% to 20%, ZIM
    requirements of different materials for                     O&M providers/utilities.                                   from 7-12% and Sunlit from NA ş 7%).
    various FPV applications.
                                                             Models and performance evaluations of different            A broader European value chain within FPV;
  Target Group 3) Public authorities.
    Policy makers, concession granting                          FPV technologies verified and published.                   Recyclable plastic components and cost-efficient PV
    bodies, standardization bodies, and other                                                                              modules for FPV applications produced in Europe.
    public authorities ş particularly relevant               The perceived risks and uncertainties related to FPV      Scientific:
    off takers for the results on sustainability,
    recycling, and pre-normative tests for                      is decreased. Investors and project developers have a   New breakthrough scientific understanding of how
    components.                                                 better understanding of risk mitigation, electricity
                                                                yield forecast and sustainability impact.                  FPV impacts local biodiversity.
  Target Group 4) The Scientific
    community will be a target group for the                 Project developers and investors have an improved          Guidelines adapted in the documentation
    general knowledge on sustainability,
    recycling, predictive energy yield and                      business case through the availability of improved         requirements of concession bodies in three European
    reliability. Outreach to a broad scientific                 FPV designs and a reduced LCOE.                            countries.
    community is also important for training                The environmental impact of FPV technology for
    of new personnel.                                       inland and offshore waters is verified to be low, or        Increased competence of scientific and technical staff.
                                                            positive, for the local environment. FPV application is
  Target Group 5) The public will be                        expanded:                                                  Societal:
    target-groups for work on sustainability
    and public acceptance.                                   Low-cost FPV technologies developed for low SSC            Appropriate regulatory frameworks for FPV

#žIMP-ACT-IAž#                                                  expands their application to higher SSC.                   implemented in EU.

                                                             A good initial knowledge base for the effect of FPV        Increased deployment rate of FPV in Europe,

                                                                power plants on [water quality, biodiversity etc.] is      implemented with higher level of circularity and a
                                                                established and widely accessible.                         substantially lower risk for the environment.

                                                             Monitoring procedures and methods to evaluate the          Deeper integration of value chain partners/customers

                                                                environmental impact of an FPV power plant are             ensuring SuRE operation of FPV power plants.
                                                                successfully implemented for new FPV power plants.
                                                                                                                        Dedicated accelerated aging tests for FPV
                                                             Permitting authorities achieve a better understanding
                                                                                                                           components introduced in new IEC standard.
                                                                of requirements/conditions for suitable waterbodies.
                                                                                                                        FPV power plants widely acknowledged as

                                                                                                                           sustainable and environmentally friendly RE
                                                                                                                           technology.

                                                            Part B - Page 31 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                    EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

3  Quality and efficiency of the implementation #@QUA-LIT-QL@# #@WRK-PLA-WP@#

                                                            The SuRE work structure promotes innovation

                                                            development for all FPV segments while

                                                            promoting targeted development of three

                                                            commercial technologies. A members-only

                                                            section of the SuRE website serves as a common

                                                            platform for formal and informal

                                                            communication. Formal project resources, such

                                                            as contracts, planning, meeting minutes, and

                                                            templates will be posted there. Project workflow

                                                            and quality control will be shared internally as

                                                            openly as possible, as closed as necessary, to

                                                            foster transparent project management. Leaders

                                                            of WPs 1-3 & 7-8 have recent experience of

                                                            similar leadership responsibilities in EU

projects. Leaders of WPs 4-6 lead internal and public R&D projects, and will receive guidance from the coordinator,

internal and external assistants, and via the collaboration baked in to SuRE. All WPs run the full duration of SuRE.

Work distribution among WPs allows for decentralized activities and responsibilities while holding clear reporting
and monitoring channels to align project management with achieving SuRE targets. Its structure is organized to reach
the objectives by fostering FPV growth overall and applying that mindset to 3 commercial technologies. Figure 10
shows the SuRE management structure. Three bodies will promote smooth management while providing
communication spaces for partners to express and discuss concerns and exchange project information: General
Assembly (GA), Steering Committee (SC), and Innovation at Commercialization Board (ICB). In addition, 3 external
experts, from Dutch national water authority, DNV, and Total Energies, respectively, have agreed to serve as an
Advisory Board (AB) to SuRE. The advisory board will be an organ to discuss fine-tuning of and uptake of results
in the broader FPV industry, for review of material, and a source of knowledge and connections with other ongoing
initiatives within FPV.
General Assembly (GA). The GA facilitates WP coordination and opportunities to discuss major changes to the
working plan. One representative from each partner will sit on the GA, meeting 4 times a year. It is the decision-
making body for major SuRE issues like changes of coordinator, work plan, budget, partners, IPR considerations,
and other general non-technical matters.
Steering Committee (SC). The SC is the operational management body and is responsible for efficient
implementation. The SuRE coordinator, WP leaders, and the commercial members of the ICB constitute the SC. The
SC works under the GA and assists, makes proposals for, and reports to, the GA. It monitors and ensures technical
quality progress, approves progress reports, coordinates review of deliverables, assesses milestones, and moderates
technical issues that span multiple WPs. The SC monitors ethics in SuRE.
Innovation and Commercialization Board (ICB). The ICB supports knowledge transfer to end-users, elevating
exploitation and commercialization opportunities that allow the IPR owners to fulfil SuRE Outcomes. Knowledge
transfer plans will be developed, according to type, application, IP conditions, and end users. ICB participation is

                                                                          mandatory for commercial partners, and optional for
                                                                          others; maximum 1 participant per partner. The
                                                                          coordinator is the ICB chairwoman.

                                                                          3.1 Work plan and resources
                                                                          As shown in Figure 9, WPs 1-3 push FPV boundaries
                                                                          in Sustainability (compassionate FPV), Reliability
                                                                          (long-lived FPV), and Efficiency (profitable FPV).
                                                                          The work here is generalizable across FPV, pushing
                                                                          boundaries for the whole field, yet also includes
                                                                          participation of the commercial partners. In the
                                                                          interior, WPs 4-6 apply the generalizable methods to
                                                                          the 3 specific FPV technologies of CTI, ZIM and
                                                                          Sunlit. The work here is specific, yet also includes
                                                                          participation of the research institutes. Maximal
                                                                          information exchange along the circumference of WPs
                                                                          1-3 and radially into WPs 4-6 is how we can reduce
CAPEX, OPEX, and LCOE while increasing environmental benefit. Minimal information exchange among the

                                                            Part B - Page 32 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                    EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

central WPs 4-6 provides independence to each technology developer to exploit their own results.

Surrounding and supporting these WPs are WP8 to coordinate and manage, and WP7 to communicate and
disseminate. WP8 also takes the role of controlling and facilitating information flow. The coordinator, who is well-
versed in commercialization communication, information protection, and multi-party R&D, will structure and be
responsible for SuRE info handling. WP7 gains access to all other WPs to extract information for sharing; WP7 is
also subject to information-flow control of the coordinator (WP8) and the owners of the information.

#žCON-SOR-CSž# #žPRJ-MGT-PMž#

Table 3.1a: List of work packages

#  Title                                                    Lead # Lead                  PMs Start End

1 Sustainable FPV Power plants                              9                       Fraunhofer 107,8  1  36

2 Reliable FPV Power plants                                 8                       TNO 101           1  36

3 Efficient FPV Power plants                                1                       IFE  94           1  36

4 Development and piloting of new CTI FPV tech.             2                       CTI  179,0        1  36

5 Development and piloting of ZIM FPV tech.                 4                       ZIM 80            1  36

6 Development of Sunlit's integrated FPV tech.              6                       Sunlit 59         1  36

7 Dissemination & Communication                             11                      Compaz 36,5       1  36

8 Coordination & Management                                 1                       IFE  48           1  36

                                                            Part B - Page 33 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                    EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

Table 3.1b: Work package description

WP number            1

WP title             Sustainable FPV Power Plants

Objectives

O1.1) Determine the interaction of FPV with ecosystem biodiversity

O1.2) Develop methodologies and guidelines to assess the effects of FPV on aquatic systems and biodiversity

O1.3) Consider potential mitigation measures to counter negative impacts of FPV

O1.4) Methods development for impact quantification by enhancing existing tools and monitoring strategies

O1.5) Publish guidelines for sustainable FPV systems, including mitigating environmental impact.

Description of work

Task 1.1: Water body classification in Europe (M1-M36)

Lead: Deltares. Participants: Deltares, IFE, LKY, BayWa, ZIM, Sunlit

Commercial partners and Deltares will combine existing catalogue of FPV-amenable European waterbodies. Then,

select waters using European WFD classification and describe those suitable for FPV according to waterbody types

(e.g., shallow lakes, deep reservoirs, intertidal zones), protected areas based on WFD and N2000, the existing

ecosystem services (e.g., drinking water, recreation, nature, water supply). The result is a decision support tool for

waterbody selection used in Task 1.2 & 1.3 and initial input to guidelines in Task 1.8. Fraunhofer will develop a

monitoring concept for FPV-water interaction. This includes monitoring hydrological variables such as oxygen

levels and water temperatures, air temperatures, and wind speed. Deltares develops a monitoring concept for FPV-

aquatic food web interaction. Both monitoring concepts are finalized in consultation with IFE, ZIM, LKY, and

Sunlit. Commercial partners then integrate sensors based on finalized monitoring concepts into FPV demonstrators

in WP 4-5. Results are the monitoring protocol, early data are for calibration and validation of modelling FPV-water

interaction in Task 1.3, and 3-year dataset for Tasks 1.3-1.5.

Task 1.2: Modelling FPV impact on ecosystem (M1-M30). Lead Fraunhofer. Participants: Deltares, IFE
We determine maximum FPV coverage (using ratio of blocked irradiation, mRBI) for a wide range of typical
European waterbodies. At less than mRBI, environmental impact conforms to Water Framework Directive
2000/60/EC water quality and biodiversity criteria. In addition, waterbody evaporation reduction will be computed
as a function of RBI. First, Fraunhofer, Deltares and IFE will calibrate their models with existing data from the
demonstrator sites or comparable sites elsewhere. Fraunhofer will run exploratory simulations in their GLM tool to
determine approximate mRBIs and evaporation reductions. Deltares will run detailed Delft3D simulations guided
by GLM-derived mRBIs to compute more refined values and with several FPV designs. Together with IFE,
evaporation reductions are computed, and results are compared with GLM 1D analysis to assess accuracy gains.
SuRE partners calibrate and validate their results with monitoring data from WPs 4-6. Results are enhanced,
validated tools to assess the direct impacts of FPV on aquatic systems (GLM and Delft3D), catalogue of maximum
permissible FPV coverage ratios (mRBIs) differentiated by waterbody type and several standard FPV designs, and
dependence of evaporation reduction on FPV coverage ratio for typical European waterbodies.

Task 1.3 Life-cycle Assessment of FPV (M6-M36)
Lead: TNO. Participants: Fraunhofer, TNO, Deltares, SABIC
TNO will provide a base model for LCA that quantifies CO2 footprints for current FPV designs using procedures
EF 3.0 and/or ReCiPe. Fraunhofer and Deltares will propose additional LCA metrics that capture FPV impact on
waterbody and biodiversity. Fraunhofer and TNO carry out LCA analyses for a variety of standard FPV designs,
including those used in demonstrators in WP 4-6. The LCA analysis of FPV systems will be enhanced by a cradle-
to-grave approach and additional impact categories such as biodiversity. SABIC contributes its expertise in plastic
components of FPV installations. TNO and Fraunhofer link to IEA Photovoltaic Power System Program Task 12
and project(s) funded by HORIZON-CL5-2022-D3-03-09 for latest PV recycling concepts. Results are enhanced
LCA methodology for FPV, assessment of ecological impact of updated FPV design throughout their life cycle.

Task 1.4 Floater-centered end-of-life and recycling options (M1-M30). Lead: SABIC. Participants: TNO
SABIC will lead the establishment of the most cost-effective, sustainable end-of-life, and recycling options for
plastic components in FPV designs used in SuRE. The goal is to improve recyclability of plastic floaters and other
components used in WP 4-6. Fraunhofer and TNO will use existing libraries for remaining FPV components,
including PV modules, cables, connectors and inverters. Results are financially feasible and sustainable end-of-life
strategies for major FPV designs.

Task 1.5 Methodology, mitigation measures and guidelines to assess environmental impact of FPV(M1-36)
Lead: Deltares, Participants: All

                                                            Part B - Page 34 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                    EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

Deltares conducts scenario studies of high-yield, low-impact FPV, preferably for demonstrator sites in WP 4-6 and

option to include similar sites elsewhere. Studies include sessions with stakeholders, technicians, landscape

designers, and ecologists to evaluate perception of different designs in the context in the three pillars of

sustainability: Residents, direct users of the water body (e.g., recreation), and public at large, governments, policy

makers; Producers and energy companies; Environmental targets (WFD N2000) and nature conservationists. Results

are definitions of barriers and enablers for FPV with a positive impact, and pathways to implementing nature

inclusive FPV designs. Based on results Tasks 1.1-1.5, Deltares and Fraunhofer will propose adjustments to FPV to

increase sustainability. Numerical simulations of a) methods to increase light penetration without compromise on

PV yield, b) plant location evaluation within waterbody to foster fish stock, and c) added structures specifically for

aquatic life. Consequences of proposed design changes for durability, LCOE, and electric yields will be numerically

evaluated in WPs 2 & 3 and refined with commercial partners. Results are a list of options for project demonstrators

to enhance sustainability and for generalizability in pre-normative standards. Finally, Fraunhofer and Deltares will

compile guidelines for development and implementation of FPV solutions with a minimally negative and/or

maximally positive environmental impact. The guidelines incorporate and summarize the learnings and results of

all WPs. Results are published guidelines for design and implementation of sustainable FPV solutions.

WP number            2

WP title             Reliable FPV Power Plants

Objectives

O2.1) Perform systematic large-scale study on field failures and stress profiles from portfolio of FPV assets

O2.2) Develop simulation models to support understanding of degradation root causes and help system design

O2.3) Develop and publish recommended accelerated reliability test procedures for components, and use these to

evaluate mitigation strategies for component failures

Description of work

Task 2.1: Large scale study on field degradation (M1-18)

Lead: TNO. Participants: IFE, Fraunhofer, LKY, CTI, BayWa, ZIM, Sunlit

Statistics on degradation modes will be collected from within and outside the consortium. The consortium has access

to a broad collection of system designs, deployment conditions, and associated degradation modes for both inland

and near shore water bodies. Information on degradation modes will be collected from field observations and data

analyses, aerial thermography, combined with time-series analysis for degradation mode detection and power loss

quantification (when possible), visual inspection, and field IV curve tracing, and site-sporadic bird soiling. Results

are key degradation modes and statistics, used as input for definition of accelerated lifetime test procedures and

mitigation of degradation modes for Tasks 2.3-5.

Task 2.2 Quantifying field stressors (M3-36). Lead: IFE. Participants: All
Gathering field data on FPV-specific stress profiles by instrumenting sites with at least two different floater
technologies with specific sensors to assess mechanical loads (using strain gauges and accelerometers), salt exposure
(for the near-shore conditions), humidity, and component time of wetness. Focus areas are mechanical loads on
hinges, cables, inverters, and PV modules; salt exposure of modules, junction boxes and connectors; local humidity
levels at inverters and underneath modules for pontoon-based structures; and time-of-wetness at junction boxes,
module edges and connectors. Results are FPV-specific stress profiles for each component to validate stress and
degradation mode modelling in Task 2.3, and to guide accelerated stress test development in Task 2.4

Task 2.3 Stress and degradation mode modelling (M3-36). Lead: IFE. Participants: Fraunhofer, CTI, ZIM, Sunlit
Develop multiscale modelling chain for assessing mechanical load and wear on individual FPV components in
relevant design scenarios. We will carry out model developments for, and establish proper interfaces between, three
state-of-the-art modelling tools: (1) Aero-hydro-servo-elastic simulation software 3DFloat (IFE), made originally
for floating wind turbines using the FPV-relevant structural and hydrodynamic modules. (2) Computational fluid
dynamics (CFD) modelling software Ansys Fluent (IFE) / COMSOL (Fraunhofer) for wind loads. (3) Finite-element
modelling (FEM) software COMSOL (Fraunhofer) / SiSim (IFE) for detailed studies on PV modules.

For 3DFloat, several modelling adaptations and improvements will be assessed and implemented as necessary to
accurately represent the FPV design scenarios. For structure, we will test replacing finite element beam sections
with basic shell elements to represent floating components more accurately. For waves and wave-structure
interactions, we will test the need for more advanced and tailored wave spectra, as well as n-body problem-based
potential theory modelling to capture neighbor interaction and array effects.

FEM will be used to study humidity ingress into PV modules and other electrical components, based on humidity
stress profiles gathered in Task 2.2. The results will be compared with results from accelerated stress testing in Task

                                                            Part B - Page 35 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                    EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

2.4 and GPV modelling to assess the need for extended or adapted humidity stress testing. FEM-based thermal

modelling (Fraunhofer) will assess hotspot formation from bird droppings, based on case studies selected from sites

monitored in the project. Results will be calculation of mechanical loads/stresses, humidity ingress and hotspot

susceptibility for the different designs scenarios. This will feed into the stress test development in Task 2.4, as well

as into the technology-specific WPs 4-6. From the loads/stresses both component ultimate limit states and fatigue

limit states will be established.

Task 2.4 Develop accelerated reliability test procedures and recommended FPV-specific standards (M7-M36)
Lead: Fraunhofer. Participants: All
Design and conduct meaningful laboratory tests to extend PV components testing to FPV challenges using
degradation mode statistics from Task 2.1, stress profiles from Task 2.2, and simulation results from Task 2.3. Target
components include PV modules, cables, connectors, and power electronics. We will focus on FPV-specific
stressors: mechanical, moisture/salt stress, and hotspots caused by isolated soiling such as bird droppings.
Preliminary submersion tests towards qualifying panels for FPV. Selected components will be subjected to test
procedures of single stressors, combined, or sequential stress tests. Results are the published test procedures and
defined test criteria., input for Task 2.5. The results from Tasks 2.1-2.5 will be summarized to create pre-normative
test guidelines for FPV equipment. The result is published state-of-art requirements and tests for FPV components,
designed to foster co-development with component suppliers thereby de-risking future FPV.

Task 2.5 Assess, design, and apply mitigation strategies for failure and degradation modes (M13-M36)

Lead: TNO. Participants: Fraunhofer, IFE, CTI, ZIM, BayWa, Sunlit, MetSolar

Improved mitigation strategies will be assessed for effectiveness in several steps. One, from degradation and stressor

findings of Tasks 2.1-3, we will determine one or more mitigation methods for modules and components and/or

their combinations. Two, by using accelerated ageing results from Task 2.4, test for failures by applying the

accelerated testing to components with and without mitigation strategies. Purpose-made samples will be

manufactured by TNO. Results are recommended improvements for material, components, and their combinations.

WP number                          3

WP title                           Efficient FPV Power Plants

Objectives

O3.1) Increase bankability for new FPV systems through more accurate EYAs

O3.2) Set up a simulation framework that enable identification of potential design improvements

O3.3) Enable improved O&M of FPV power plants by combining the models developed into a digital twin.

Description of work

Task 3.1: Monitoring, data collection and data quality (M1-M24)

Lead: IFE. Participants: TNO, Fraunhofer, CTI, LKY, BayWa, ZIM, Sunlit

The aim of this task is to ensure that the data-basis for carrying out the work inn all the WPs in the project is as good

as it possibly can be. Production and monitoring data from real sites is indispensable to validate models and extract

reference values. Monitoring- and production data from power plants, pilots, and test sites of different sizes, will be

collected from all partners, including production and monitoring data from 18 sites owned by CTI/LKY, 3 sites

owned by BayWa, and 3 sites owned by Sunlit. Data from these sites will be quality controlled, and additional

monitoring equipment will be installed if needed. The research partners also have ownership of data from various

smaller FPV systems that will also be utilized in the project. This includes a well instrumented Ciel & Terre system

in South Africa, TNOs test site in the Netherlands and Fraunhofers's German test site.

Task 3.2: Quantification of performance losses for FPV (M3-M30)
Lead: IFE. Participants: TNO, Fraunhofer, CTI, LKY, BayWa, ZIM, Sunlit, Metsolar
To assess thermal loss, CFD models previously developed at IFE and Fraunhofer will a) be developed to include
evaporative cooling, and b) be using the specific geometries and material properties of the FPV technologies as
input. Together with production and monitoring data (Task 3.1) the models will be used to analyse efficiency of the
different cooling mechanisms (convective, radiative, conductive, evaporative), as a function of climatic parameters.
Recommended practice on how to include thermal losses of FPV power plants in the most widely used commercial
tool, PVsyst, will be published. To assess PLR and soiling loss rates, the work will follow two routes previously
developed for ground-based PV and published by IFE19 and Fraunhofer. One is based on an analytical, iterative
approach ("Combined Degradation and Soiling loss, CODS"), the other is based on machine learning on order to
decompose performance index time series into a soiling component, a degradation component, and a seasonal
component. Further model development will be to adapt filtering routines to account for FPV specific losses, such
as WIML or local soiling variation or other FPV specific signatures. To assess WIML, TNO and IFE will model
mismatch and compared to monitoring values for the technologies in the consortium at selected sites. Fixed POA is

                                                            Part B - Page 36 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                    EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

translated to moving POA irradiance given different sea states and the movement of the respective FPV technology.

The hydrodynamic models will be developed or adapted in WP2. From this, an electrical model will be used to

calculate the mismatch in each string, and the effect of different inverters/maximum power point trackers is analysed.

Finally, a wave-induce mismatch corrected Performance Ratio is calculated.

Task 3.3: Digital twins (M12-M36)
Lead: IFE. Participants: Fraunhofer, TNO, CTI, LKY, BayWa, ZIM, Sunlit, Metsolar
With the major loss mechanisms for the three FPV technologies identified, simulated, and quantified through work
in Tasks 3.1 and 3.2, the work in this task will combine them to make a digital twin to study interdependencies and
potential improvements in the design, and potentially to continuously benchmark the live performance of the power
plants. The work will be done with two levels of complexity. First, a digital twin of the PV power plant will be built
in python. This is based on modifications of existing code developed at IFE and Fraunhofer. The parameterization
of thermal losses (U-values) and WIML that has been developed in Task 3.2 will be used to reduce the processing
time and interaction between different types of models. Representative soiling loss rates and PLRs based on results
from Task 3.2 will also be used as input. Second, we will explore a more complex digital twin combining the actual
simulations performed in Task 3.2, this will be done for one FPV technology. This digital twin is expected to be
computationally heavy, and we will study and quantify the inaccuracies inferred by various simplifications applied
to the individual simulations.

Task 3.4. Optimizing cell- and module technology for FPV applications (M6-M24)
Lead: MetSolar. Participants: IFE, TNO, Sunlit, BayWa, CTI, LKY
Production costs of different cell and module technologies versus the resulting efficiency in the field will be
analysed. Field efficiency will be calculated for the three FPV technologies in the consortium and applications in
Europe. Then, we will evaluate the cell- and module selections that contribute to the lowest LCOEs. Next, MetSolar
will consider adaptions in their production-lines to accommodate the optimization. The choice of adaptions must
follow from the analysis, but three likely pathways have been identified; 1) prismatic glass to adapt to low incident
angles for FPV, 2) change in cell size to M10/M12 to have higher efficiency modules to offset the greater BoS cost,
and 3) adaptions to reduce PRL and improve reliability for FPV applications, based on results from Task 2.5.

Task 3.5: LCOE calculations (M6-M36)

Lead: TNO. Participants: Fraunhofer, CTI, LKY, BayWa, ZIM, Sunlit, Metsolar, IFE.

This task will set up the methodology for LCOE calculations to be used as a foundation when proposing options for

cost-effective engineering solutions throughout the project and to enable comparative LCOE estimations. LCOE is
strongly dependent on location, type of water body and choice of technology, so a bottom-up approach28 will be

used. To consider the impact on LCOE for different use cases, a set of parameters such as sea state, locations, water

depth, etc. will be defined. For each parameter, the relation with the different components of LCOE calculations is

defined. Correlation between given parameters and energy yield and degradation is found in Task 3.2, whilst the

respective impact on CAPEX and OPEX is done together with the FPV technology providers within the consortium.

WP number            4

WP title             Development and piloting of new CTI FPV technology

Objectives

O4.1) Test and verify basic design of new CTI technology

O4.2) Reduce LCA further through assessing recycled materials with lower carbon footprint

O4.3) Optimize design for next generation of the technology

Description of work

Task 4.1: CTI Pilot of at least 5 MW (M1 to M18). Lead: CTI. Participants: LKY

First large-scale installation (5 MW pilot) of fundamentally new CTI FPV technology, with reduced LCOE and

improved LCA compared to the existing CTI FPV technology, Hydrelio, and installation follow-up (the installation

itself will be done by CTI's customer and subcontractors). A pre-pilot of 50kW will be first installed to assess the

new system design and validate its deployment for the 5MW pilot. A standard SCADA and monitoring system will

be installed by the customer while IFE, TNO, Fraunhofer, and Deltares will contribute with installation of additional

sensors packages for biodiversity, performance, and reliability of structure and anchoring. Data from the pilot will

be used to perform measurements and verify models in WP1, 2, 3, and 4. The pilot forms an essential basis for

further developments, as described in Tasks 4.2-8.

Task 4.2 Sustainable materials (M1 to M36) Lead: CTI. Participants: SABIC, TNO
Using ongoing learnings from pilot (Task 4.1), integrate and validate sustainable materials. Start with selecting
materials meeting criteria of sourcing, mechanical fitness, water-stable, toxicity, and sustainability. Testing

                                                            Part B - Page 37 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                    EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

performed for ageing, mechanical strength, and compatibility with industrial production. Materials used in pilot

(Task 4.1) will be compared to more sustainable (such as recycled) materials in order to improve performance and

carbon footprint. CTI will collaborate with SABIC (WP1) and TNO for ageing tests (WP2).

Task 4.3 Assessment of reliability for different loads, environments, and sea states (M1 to M24)
Lead: CTI. Participants: TNO, IFE
Measurements of mechanical loads and strain on structures and mooring/anchoring of the 5 MW pilot will be used
to validate and adapt models developed prior to pilot installation. Use best-known accelerated stress tests from WP2
to perform CTI-specific ageing and fatigue tests. Complimentary mechanical tests (tensile tests, ageing, fatigue, and
corrosion tests) will be performed with CTI internal lab, and in collaboration with TNO and IFE in Tasks 2.2 and
2.3. Results are quantified by showing a) reduction of over-design and b) subsequent LCOE reduction. A bench
development will allow to qualify CTI pilot's structure in relation to its interactions with the panel.

Task 4.4 Assessing and optimizing the next generation of the CTI design, including O&M optimizations and
Anchoring (M1 to M36). Lead: CTI. Participants: LKY, Fraunhofer, IFE, TNO, Deltares
Inputs from work on anchoring, O&M optimization, Tasks 4.1-4.3, WP2 (mechanical strength) and WP3 (losses,
LCOE) will be used to assess and optimize the new system to reach TRL6. Anchoring simulations with CTI internal
model for interaction between the floating structure and its anchoring system to understand mechanical loads passing
through the structure and the anchoring system. Considerations include wind pattern for FPV design to include gust
size applied for FPV anchoring design. In parallel, IFE will do the same with their own models. Comparisons among
the models will allow model improvement and optimizing the anchoring system design used on the pilot (Task 4.1)
and go from TRL 4 to 6/7. The design modifications are planned to be installed on next generation CTI product. For
efficient O&M, CTI has developed a bespoke maintenance device which will be tested on the pilot. To date, an
experimental proof of concept exists, and target is to improve it for use in the operational environment of the pilot
(from TRL3 to 7). Finally, CTI, with input from SABIC, Fraunhofer, TNO, IFE, and MetSolar, will assess CAPEX,
OPEX, LCOE and LCA of the 5 MW plant as a benchmark, and then co-optimize the individual considerations and
improvements studied in Task 4.1-5 against each other. This includes everything from the ease of the industrial
production processes of the chosen design to logistics, mechanical strength and expected lifetime, O&M, and
expected production.

Task 4.5 Water quality and biodiversity impact (M1 to M36) Lead: CTI. Participants: LKY, Deltares, Fraunhofer
To assess water quality and toxicity, CTI/LKY will monitor changes in water at different water strata and assess its
chemical composition. CTI, Fraunhofer, and Deltares will use sampling methodology developed in WP1, including
pre-, mid-, and post-install of the pilot (Task 4.1). CTI and LKY will also contribute with data from existing FPV
plants in Japan. To assess impact on biodiversity, Deltares will pre-assess the pilot using ecological inventories
based acoustic recording, visit of experts and DNA samples. Inventory will cover the species on the site (avifauna,
pisciculture, entomofauna, flora) to have an exhaustive analysis. A sizing of biodiversity enhancement measures
will also be carried out, as examples, for installation of ponds for amphibians and walls for swallows. For
monitoring, Deltares will visit the site pre-, mid- and post-install to measure the FPV plant and enhancement-
measures impacts. Data sharing with WP1 to include in generalizable results, modelling, and guidelines.

Task 4.6 Business case. Lead: CTI. Participants: LKY (M1 ş M30)

CTI and LKY will study the business environment related to the project outcomes. The task will start from the

beginning of the project and will be closely aligned with research and pilot activities. Objectives will be a) to explore

the marketing opportunities, b) to analyze the drivers and barriers for the adoption of the technology among

stakeholders of the whole value chain, c) to define new business models, and d) share the achievements (project

realizations) in the proper communication channels to show and expand the potential market. Business interest,

market attractiveness and business models will be evaluated. The task will feed the Consortium exploitation plan

(Task 7.2), while sensitive outcomes will remain internal to LKY and CTI.

WP number                              5

WP title                               Development and piloting of Zimmermann FPV technology

Objectives

O5.1) Concept development ZIM Float for rougher waters & environment to increase standard design principles to

SSC4 (1.5-2 m significant wave hight)

O5.2) Reduce CAPEX and OPEX by adequate design and selection of BOS components and materials

O5.3) Build 5 MW pilot that combines WP1-3 best practices with ZIM Float and BayWa system design

Description of work

Task 5.1: Component updates, lab and field testing under simulated conditions (Hardware) (M1-M18)

                                                            Part B - Page 38 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                    EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

Lead: ZIM. Participants: BayWa, TNO, IFE

Modify component designs for use on flexible island with SSCs 2-4. Inputs are conditions identified in Tasks 5.2-

3. Use computational and prototype tests of new materials and/or concepts to test structural pieces that link island

parts. Tests include force, vibration, corrosion, cyclic cable bending, inverter and transformer shaking and swinging,

bending construction and connectors, material interaction, bio-interaction and biofouling, and system-mooring

connectors. Testing conditions are humidity, salinity, cyclic loading based on results of Task 5.2. Results are top

candidates to be tested /implemented in Tasks 5.3-4.

Task 5.2: Measure island motion, forces, and environment (M1-M18)
Lead: BayWa. Participants: ZIM, IFE, TNO
ZIM and BayWa will identify existing plants for installing wave, motion, force, and ambient sensors. Sensor type,
deployment method, and analysis will be developed with IFE and TNO. Inputs are from WP2. Targets are
quantifying environmental stressors, load cycles, and deriving how degradation factors interact. Candidate factors
are global island movement, humidity, salinity, and sunlight; candidate failures are in inverters, transformer stations,
modules, and connectors. Results are analysis of data which will are input to Tasks 5.2-4.

Task 5.3: From met ocean data to design standards (M6-M30)
Lead: BayWa. Participants: ZIM, IFE, TNO
Use literature review and measurements from Task 5.2 to connect water body categories with environmental
conditions and FPV design. Assemble optimized components in Task 5.1, measurements in Task 5.2, and WP1-3
results to make decision tree for faster, standardized FPV design. Incorporate optimized FPV island flexibility to
reduce material use, decreases lifetime costs, and adhere to sustainability procedures. Results are the candidates to
be tested in pilot Task 5.4 and information feedback/feedforward with Tasks 5.2-3 and WP1-3.

Task 5.4: ZIM/BayWa Pilot of at least 5 MW and subsequent analysis (M18-M36)
Leads: BayWa. Participants: ZIM, IFE, Deltares, Fraunhofer, TNO
Build 5 MW pilot using up-to-date advances from SuRE. Incorporating best practices of own technology
development from Tasks 5.1-3 and WPs 1-3. Pilot contains extra sensors for added research benefit and accelerated
expansion to higher SSCs, choice of sensors defined in WP1-3. Results are customer-connected pilot with future
access for measurement and research. The first annual cycle will be used to assess improvements and verify models
and methodology developed in SuRE.

Task 5.5: Pre-, mid-, and post-Pilot install environmental studies (M1-M36)

Lead: Deltares. Participants: BayWa, ZIM, Fraunhofer

Use pilot site to implement environmental impact tests on a specific FPV project to show general applicability. Use

methodologies of Task 1.6 and early draft guidelines of Task 1.8 to establish protocols and measurements at pilot

site before, during, and after installation of the pilot from Task 5.4. Results are timeline study, recommended

improvements to guidelines of Task 1.8, and recommended improvements to future FPV.

WP number            6

WP title             Development of Sunlit's integrated FPV tech

Objectives

O6.1.1) Developing a digital product development cycle for Sunlit's aluminum floater

O6.2.1) Optimized selection of new floater generation prototype

Description of work

Task 6.1: FEM model development for pressing of aluminum (M1-M24). Lead: IFE. Participants: Sunlit

Model development specifically for WP6 will be on aluminum-float pressing, central to Sunlit manufacturing. IFE

will extend its existing FEM modelling ecosystem to handle numerically challenging large metal deformations that

occur in this process. The new tool, FormSim, will be developed as a module for existing tools SiSim and AlSim,

where additional algorithms will be implemented to handle large mesh deformations and for anisotropic yield stress

model. Further, code developments will implement higher order plasticity elements, robust triggers, thresholds for

remeshing, and error bounded remeshing. Results are used in Tasks 6.2 (and further in 6.3-4)

Task 6.2 Model harmonization and interfacing for holistic digital product development (M12 ş M26)
Lead: IFE. Participants: Sunlit, TNO
Digital product development cycle implementation, using all key design parameters of the aluminum float. Sunlit
guide establishing and implementing interfaces between the following modelling tools: i) Combined FEM and CFD
model chain to get mechanical stress profiles on the float for a given design case, developed in WT2.3 (IFE). ii)
CFD modelling of fluid and heat flows, developed in WT 3.2 (IFE). iii) FEM model of the aluminum pressing,
developed in WT6.1 (IFE). iv) LCA model developed in WT1.3 (TNO). Especially important is harmonizing input

                                                            Part B - Page 39 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                    EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

and output data from the different models to enable automated mapping of the parameter space and rapid iteration

turnover. Results are modelling capabilities at different accuracy-levels will be used actively to quickly screen the

parameter space and converge to promising design candidates. Results are used in Task 6.3 (and further in 6.4)

Task 6.3 Pareto frontier mapping & prototype candidate selection (M20 ş M32)
Lead: Sunlit. Participants: IFE, Fraunhofer, Metsolar
Use modelling framework from Task 6.2 to efficiently map Pareto frontier of float-design parameter space. Key
design parameters for exploration because of co-impact on sustainability, reliability, and cost are (1) Reduced
aluminum thickness and/or aluminum feedstock quality, such as with recycled aluminum; 2) Modified floater shape
for increased mechanical robustness in rougher waters and/or for lower aluminum consumption; (3) Changed floater
size to reduce unit costs (from cabling, factory operations, PV cell and module, etc.) per square meter; (4) Improved
cup design to achieve more homogeneous water cooling for improved performance and reliability. This work will
happen in concert with Metsolar, who will harness the modularity of the PV industry and match module to float
design. Further, Sunlit's bill of materials compendium will help identify more- and less-expensive alternatives to
today's production. New, market-available optical components, PV cells and prismatic glass, will be examined to
further push these fronts. Results are prototype designs from Pareto analysis, used in Task 6.4.

Task 6.4 Prototype production and field deployment (M28 ş M36) Lead: Sunlit. Participants: IFE, Metsolar

Informed by models and design process developed and carried out in Tasks 6.1-6.3, prototypes will be built. Protype

testing in subcontracted wave-tank with extra sensors will validate simulated results. Sunlit will manufacture small

press tools using existing machinery built to test the most critical parts of stretch forming. The best design will be

the basis for the next generation press tool. The press tool will be built and installed in a large hydraulic press to

make full-size product. Financing for the tool is outside of SuRE, the Innovation Fund will be considered. Final

wave-tank tests will verify the design. Sunlit will build an (approximately) 100 kW pilot installation by the end

SuRE (Singl°ya Nord, Norway) with guarantees of future access to production data SuRE research partners.

WP number                        7

WP title                         Dissemination, Exploitation and Communication

Objectives

O7.1) Targeted strategic communication that strengthen and expand synergies

O7.2) Timely and appropriate dissemination of SuRE outcomes to appropriate Target Groups

O7.3) Coordinate innovation efforts and use consortium strengths to maximize exploitation of KERs

Description of work

Task 7.1 Develop and implement communication and dissemination plan (CDP) (M1-M36)

Lead: Compßz. Participants: All

The task will be focused on the definition, coordination, and implementation of the CDP. In the first six months, the

SuRE identity (logo, graphical chart) and the Kit of Communication Materials (website, brochure, template, flyers,

video) will be developed. The first CDP, D7.1, will be released at M6, with subsequent updated plans in M18 and

M30. Social network accounts for the project will be set up. From M6 and onwards, the framework developed, will

be filled with content and regularly updated to inform about project news. The partners will attend the targeted

conferences, publications, lectures, outreach events and workshops as detailed in Sec 2.2.1. Compaz will perform

Communication activities as detailed in Section 2.2.3 and track the Dissemination activities. All partners have

planned activities to contribute to communication and dissemination of SuRE results. In addition to Compaz and

IFE, BayWa, with their strong network among water-body owners, drinking water utilities, hydropower operators

and public authorities, will have a particularly active role within the dissemination work.

Task 7.2 Exploitation and Innovation management (M1-M36). Lead: IFE. Participants: All
IFE implements innovation management to allow SuRE to respond to external and internal opportunities to exploit
creative efforts to introduce new ideas, services, processes, and products. Key elements have been listed in Sec 2.2.3.
Key SuRE innovation management is monitoring innovation actions and supporting partners to enhance their own
innovation capacity to integrate new knowledge. Task 7.2 identifies companies' go-to-market needs and to provide
support to enhance their own potential for impact delivery. Innovation management will be closely related to the
project tasks on exploitation and defining the key exploitable results. The consortium partners will have individual
exploitation plans feeding into the Consortium exploitation plan delivered in M12. Innovation management will be
discussed in every General Assembly, with concessions for limited-audience conversation when required.

Task 7.3 FPV SuRE short films (M1-M36). Lead: Compßz. Participants: All
Compßz will create yearly 2-min short films about the project goals and the global objectives and vision of the
project. The films will be produced and released from the start of the project each year. The content of these videos

                                                            Part B - Page 40 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                    EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

will be the communication line and content of the communication activities and diffused on the social media. It will

serve SuRE in its communication activities to reach larger audiences beyond FPV professionals.

WP number                         8

WP title                          Coordination and Management

Objectives

O8.1) Coordinate SuRE; oversee R&I and ensure communication between partners

O8.2) Project management: Quality assurance, time planning, reporting (according to CA), and financial control

O8.3) Anticipation and evasion of risks, problems, and conflicts

O8.4) Definition, implementation, and compliance of data management plan

O8.5) Elevate novelties for fair allocation of IPR according to Consortium Agreement

Description of work

Task 8.1 Admin, Financial, Legal Management, and European Commission Reports (M1-M36). Lead: IFE

Project management is via consolidated management of the different processes (costs, resources, communication,

content and delay, risks, purchase, legal, and excellent). PM includes managing interactions among partners, WPs,

activities, external relationships, and managing modification and deviations. Task 8.1 includes management of

overall SuRE progress through meetings and technical and financial reporting. Reports will be collected from WP

leaders on 6-month intervals. WP8 will manage preparations and dissemination of reports. IFE, as coordinator, will

ensure communication and reporting with EC, including any potential major issues or changes in the work plan. IFE

will oversee establishment and monitoring of governing boards.

Task 8.2 Risk management (M1-M36). Lead: IFE
Risk management ensures proper risk handling and prediction, impacts estimation, and mitigation execution. Each
participant, from partners to the General Assembly (GA), is responsible for continuous potential risk monitoring
and reporting to the coordinator to allow early identification and mitigation. Identified risks will be brought to the
GA for amelioration.

Task 8.3 Research data: Management plan and standardization (M1-M36). Lead: IFE
SuRE is composed of a broad group of researchers, commercial actors, and communication specialists. We will
produce large and heterogenous datasets, some of which will be proprietary, others obfuscated to protect its origins,
and others for the public domain. Further, we will also generate several statistical and mechanistic models and the
results of their implementation. Task 8.3 will develop and implement the SuRE data management plan according to
FAIR principles; current recommendations or standards provide guidelines for big and small datasets, codes and
models. IFE will generate and distribute metadata templates supporting FAIR handling and completion using the
public resource Norwegian Centre for Research Data (NSD). Common procedures and standard methodologies will
follow international guidelines for maximal value and comparability. The Management Board (MB) will agree and
circulate written guidelines and standard operating procedures for implementation. Task 8.3 provides continuous
FAIR documentation and data handling support to all WPs.

Task 8.4 Sex and gender dimensions in FPV (M1-M36) Lead: IFE. Participants: All
Kickoff, mid-point, and closure meetings include a workshop session with external advisor who will address
innovation and workplace aspects leading to improved gender equality at all levels of PV industry.

Table 3.1c: List of Deliverables

No   Deliverable                  Short description               W                 Lead           Dissemi Delivery
        name                                                      P                       Type nation date

                                                                                                     level (month)

1.1 Monitoring Protocol for measuring hydrological 1 Fraunhofer OTH PU                              M6

          Concepts and ambient variables, including                                       ER

                     waterbody selection

1.2 FPV coverage Publication on FPV coverage and                  1 Deltares R                  PU  M30

                     impact on environment

1.3 LCA report LCA (CO2/materials/biodiv.) CTI/ZIM 1                                TNO   R     PU  M24

1.4       Plastics   Recommended process and material 1 SABIC                             R     PU  M24

          recycling for plastic components in FPV

1.5 Biodiversity Review of FPV designs for                        1 Deltares R SEN M30

          mitigation biodiversity and potential pathways to

                     nature inclusive FPV designs.

1.6 Guidelines FPV Final FPV sustainability report w/             1 Fraunhofer R                PU  M36

                                                            Part B - Page 41 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                    EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

     Sustainability potential for biodiversity increase.

2.1 Failure modes Statistical analysis of failure modes                  2 TNO           R SEN M18

2.2 Field stressors Quantification of field stressors                    2          IFE  R SEN M30

2.3 Degradation stress and degradation mode modelling                    2          IFE  R  PU   M36

2.4 Accel. stress Accelerated reliability test for FPV                   2 TNO           R  PU   M36

2.5 Mitigation Report on assessing and applying                          2 TNO           R  PU   M36

         strategies mitigation strategies for failure modes

3.1 WIML Report Report on annual mismatch losses                         3 TNO           R  PU   M30

3.2 Thermal model Paper on FPV Thermal Modelling                         3          IFE  R  PU   M30

3.3 Soiling and PLR Report on PLR and soiling loss rate                  3          IFE  R SEN M30

3.4 Digital twin An operating digital twin                               3 Fraunhofer DEM PU     M36

3.5 CTI LCOE Report on LCOE of CTI                                       3 Fraunhofer R     SEN  M32

3.6      CTI ZIM     Report on LCOE of Zimmermann                        3 Fraunhofer R     SEN  M36

4.1 CTI's pilot (v.1) 5MW pilot installed w/ monitoring                  4          CTI DEM SEN  18

4.2      Report      The report will gather the tests results            4          CTI  R SEN   36

     sustainable mat. and industrial results

4.3 Report on tech. The report will gather the tests results             4          CTI  R  SEN  24

         Validation and industrial results

4.4 Specific O&M A system prototype demonstration in                     4          CTI DEM SEN  30

         device      operational environment

4.5      Optimise    Report on software model with                       4          CTI  R  SEN  30

     anchoring sim. optimized parameters

4.6 Environmental Report gathering results of the analysis               4 LKY           R  SEN  36

         study report of biodiv. and water quality

5.1      Load model  Accurate Hydrodynamic model of                      5          ZIM  R  SEN  12
                     loads on connectors & steel structure

5.2 Design spec. Specifications of materials, connectors,                5          ZIM  R  SEN  18

           pilot     anchoring solutions for varying SCCs

5.3 Corrosion Report on steel coatings for salt-water                    5          ZIM  R  SEN  18

         testing     applications

5.4      BayWa/ZIM   5MW pilot installed w/monitoring                    5 BayWa DEM SEN         22
             pilot

5.5 Field stressors Measurements at BayWa/ZIM pilot                      5 BayWa R          PU   26

6.1 Sunlit model Data-format and inter-model data-                       6          IFE  R  SEN  M20

           chain     transfer specifications

6.2 Sunlit Pareto Pareto Frontier mapping, identification                6 Sunlit        R  SEN  M24

                     of promising prototype designs

6.3 Sunlit BOM Module cost and efficiency                                6 Metsolar R SEN M30

                     improvements for Sunlit's design

6.4 Sunlit Pilot ~ 100 kW pilot installed w/monitoring                   6 Sunlit DEM PU         M34

7.1 SuRE Film 3 x 2 min film from SuRE and FPV                           7 Compßz DEC PU 12,24,36

8.1 Risk & mana- Document describing management of                       8          IFE  R  PU   M6

         gement plan SuRE and its risk

8.2 Data man. plan Data management plan of SuRE                          8          IFE  DMP PU  M6

8.3 Progress Report Management, Technical, Innovation                    8          IFE  R  PU M12,24,

         (v.1, 2, 3) and Gender Progress Reporting                                               M36

8.4 Final report Final report detailing SuRE results                     8          IFE  R  PU   M36

Table 3.1d: List of milestones

Milestone            Milestone name                         WPs   Due                           Means of verification
                                                                 date M
number                                                        8                                    Physical Meeting
                                                              7     3                           Plan published online.
     M1              Kick-off meeting                         7     6               Website with logos/graphical profile online
                                                              7     6               Joint exploitation plan circulated internally
     M2              CDP released                             1     12                Meeting with coordinator, plan for joint
                                                                    6
     M3           Communication Platforms

     M4              Exploitation Plan

     M5    Link established to FP in CL5-

                                                            Part B - Page 42 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                    EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

               2022-D3-03-09                                                             workshop

M6             Access to existing data                      1-6  4                  Data collected and shared with RP
               CTI/ZIM/Sunlit sites

M7             Sites for extra monitoring                   1-3  8                  3 existing PPs selected for installation of
                   equipment defined                                                    additional monitoring equipment

M8             Install additional sensors                   1 -3 12                 Sensors installed on 3 existing power plants

M9             Scope of sustainability studies              5    12                  Mutual understanding what studies, with
                            defined                                                 what scope and timeline will be performed

M10            Met-ocean conditions                         5    6                  Mapped environmental factors for SSC2,3, 4

M11 Critical Components identified 5                             10                 System fully screened for components that
                                                                                     needs to be re-design to SSC 4 locations

M12            Data from CTI 5 MW pilot                     4    20                      Pilot up and running

M13            ZIM/BayWa 5 MW pilot                         5    18 Permits granted, pilot design fully defined

M14            Data from ZIM 5 MW pilot                     5    22                 Pilot w/monitoring equipment installed

M15            Data from Sunlit pilot                       6    30                 Pilot w/monitoring equipment installed

M16            E-Plan complete                              7    34                 Exploitation Plan Completed

Table 3.1e: Critical risks for implementation #@RSK-MGT-RM@#

Description of risk (i) likelihood, and (ii) severity: WPs                      Proposed risk-mitigation measures

               Low/Medium/High                                                Stringent project management and good
                                                                                 coordination in the work packages
Deviation of the schedule at critical points                     ALL
                                                                          Using literature values, use research sites.
               (low/high)                                                 Install monitoring equipment at new sites.

Lack of data from sites to use in for model calibration 1,2,3                Adapt impact categories to available data,
                                                                                      obtain data from literature
and/or validation in WP1, 2 and 3. (low/medium)
                                                                             Reallocating resources to work more with
        Lack of data for comprehensive LCA                       1         model, or adapt solution with a safety margin

               (medium/medium)                                              Use a less innovative but more mature and
                                                                                    based on the same principles.
Modelling results too coarse for efficient use                   4, 5, 6            Change processing or material
                  (low/medium)
                                                                            To deploy more efforts on communication
CTI's client reject the new O&M tech. as not mature 4                                            activities
enough (TRL) for the 5MW pilot. (medium/medium)
                                                                          Other sites are available in both CTI/LKY and
Recycled materials have negative impacts on water or 4, 6                                ZIM/BayWa portfolio

           are too expensive (medium/high)                                   Second sourcing and early commissioning
                                                                            Derivation of procedures of other norms or
Influencers or activities may take a stand against the 4, 5
                                                                                     DNV recommended practice
               project (low/high)

Pilot site permits could be postponed or not granted 4, 5
   => delay forecasted activities (medium/high)

           Material availability (low/high)                      4, 5, 6

Insufficient standards that are applicable (low/high) 4, 5, 6

Table 3.1f: Staff efforts #žRSK-MGT-RMž#

Staff efforts  WP1 WP2 WP3                   WP4            WP5  WP6      WP7       WP8  Total PM/ Participant
                                               9              6   15        6        28             132
1. IFE         2 37 29                                        0    0        2         1             141
                                             121              0    0        1         1              50
2. CTI         2 13 2                         28             44    0        1         3              57
                                               0             23    0       4,5        1             37,5
3. LKY         2  1 17                         0              0   27        1         1             35,5
                                               0              0   11        1         1              25
4. ZIM         3  3                3           1              4    4        1         3              72
                                               8              3    2        2         4              67
5. BayWa       3  3                3           3              0    0        1         1             58,3
                                               5              0    0       15         3              18
6. Sunlit      1,5 2 3                         0              0    0        1         1              12
                                               4             80   59                 48            705,3
7. MetSolar    1  4                6         179                          36,5

8. TNO         10 24 18

9. Fraunhofer 29 12 12

10. Deltares   51,3 0 0

11. Compßz     0  0                0

12. SABIC      3  2                1

Total PM       107,8 101 94

                                                            Part B - Page 43 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                    EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

Table 3.1g: Subcontracting costs

Subcontracting costs Cost () Description of tasks and justification

CTI                      9000 Installation of monitoring equipment and sensors on 5 MW pilot

CTI                      60000 Processing of material for next generation recycled plastics

CTI                      75000 Static and cyclic mechanical testing of 5 MW pilot BoS

CTI                      30000 Production of the new O&M device

CTI                      62000 Simulation of anchoring for pilot site, benchmark simulations for further

                                  optimization of anchoring solutions in the consortium

CTI                      30000 Static and cyclic mech. testing of updated technology (after 5 MW pilot)

LKY                      60000 Water quality measurements for existing sites

ZIM                      35000 Weathering and tensile and sharpy test of different materials

ZIM                      60000 Static and structural design and verification, fatigue simulation and FEM

ZIM                      25000 Corrosion testing and verification

BayWa                    52000 Derive met-ocean conditions and adaption of the anchoring to SCC4

BayWa                    45000 Testing of cables and inverters for vibration and movement

Deltares                 38400 Education and guidance of the PhD by Utrecht University

Table 3.1h: Purchase costs (OGWS: Other goods, works and services)

Participant: 2/CTI                Cost () Justification

Travel and subsistence 19 267 WP8: Project meetings (2x5 meetings), WP2, WP4: Technical meetings

                                  WP7: Participation in dissemination activities and international fairs.

Equipment                         230 000 50kW R&D pilot at first, amortized over 3 years (100000), O&M

                                  device procurement (50 000), optimization trials (300 000), optimized

                                  anchoring systems procurement (20 000), prototype parts (BoS, cable

                                  and electrical equipment supports) (30 000)

OGWS                              35 000 Patent fees and CFS

Participant: 4/ZIM

Travel and subsistence 15 000 Travel to project meeting and sites

Equipment                         25 000 Cost for sensors and monitoring equipment including installation

OGWS                              28 000 Material costs, testing of connectors and mooring connectors. CFS.

Participant: 5/BayWa

Travel and subsistence 12 000 Travel to project meetings, fairs/dissemination activities, pilot site

Equipment                         75 000 Sensors for acceleration, vibration, humidity, and evaporation

OGWS                              5 000 CFS

Participant: 6/Sunlit

Travel and subsistence 4 500 1 person, 4 meetings abroad (1 meeting in Norway)

Equipment                         15 000 Monitoring equipment, pilot

OGWS                              157 000 Materials (aluminum, steel) software license, CFF and logistics

Participant: 7/MetSolar

Travel and subsistence 5 000 1 person, 4 travels

Equipment                         55 000 Tools to handles M10/12 wafers, depreciated over SuRE lifetime.

Participant: 8/TNO

Travel and subsistence 25 000 Project meetings, field visits, conference

Equipment                         67 000 Laboratory equipment, TNO field lab

OGWS                              45 980 Consumables for module manufacturing and components, CFS

For the partners IFE, LKY, Deltares, Fraunhofer, and SABIC, purchase costs are under 15% of the personnel cost.
No in-kind contributions from third parties and other costs categories are envisioned for SuRE.

3.2 Capacity of participants and consortium as a whole #@CON-SOR-CS@# #@PRJ-MGT-PM@#
SuRE has 12 partners from 6 European countries, composed of 4 research institutes and 8 companies, as presented
in Chapter 1. The project will build two 5 MW FPV demonstrators plus one smaller, yet commercially relevant,
demonstrator. The pilot sites will be situated in Belgium (CTI/LKY, building and connection permits in place),
Netherlands (BayWa) and Norway (Sunlit). As we describe in the introduction Sec. 1.1.1, every member of SuRE
works actively in FPV. The research partners in SuRE are at the international forefront of FPV research and already
collaborate actively with the FPV industry, including SuRE partners. This is also evident from the list of FPV related
projects in Part A of this proposal. The institutes have recognized publications within the field of FPV and are

                                                            Part B - Page 44 of 45
Call: [HORIZON-CL5-2023-D3-01-03] -- [Floating PV Systems]

                                                                                    EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA and IA): V3.2 ş 15.11.2022

regularly invited to present their work at international conferences, workshops, and fairs. CTI is the second largest

producer of FPV technology globally measured by installed capacity, ZIM/BayWa is the leading FPV technology

provider/installer in Europe with a market share of 60%, and Sunlit have patented a promising, novel, FPV technology

which they are rapidly scaling up. SABIC and Metsolar support FPV technology development by providing necessary

expertise in the components. All partners are commercially active, R&D active, and committed to environmental

positivity of FPV. Compßz, with experience at the nexus of communication-public engagement-solar energy, puts

SuRE in the limelight to showcase the technical, social, and environmental focus of our work. We are prepared, and

exceptionally well positioned, to solve the challenges posed in the call: elevate the environmental position of FPV,

expand the application and decrease the LCOE. Every partner in SuRE has worked with at least one other partner on

previous FPV activities, as shown in Part A. SuRE has been built up based on competence, dialogue and close

cooperation between the partners, without mediators or consultants taking care of writing the proposal. The project

starts from a good understanding of the partners' roles, tasks, and responsibilities and all of them have actively

contributed to shaping the activities of SuRE.

IFE has experience as coordinator in H2020 and Horizon Europe, and has a dedicated European Affairs Department,
who will assist on financial matters and reporting. IFE's Coordination Team allocated for this project will consist of
3 people, including principal scientist, Dr. Josefine Selj as technical coordinator, 1 European advisor (who will
manage the financial and EU reporting aspects) and the Head of European Affairs and Business Development of IFE.
This setup allows effective contact with the European Commission while enabling scientific progress. Organization
of SuRE WPs, as described in Sec 3.1, is designed to allow all partners to complement one another. Major laboratory
and production infrastructure are in place at the sites required; SuRE is a method to share expertise and resources
without needing to double-up on equipment or training. Such collaborative exchanges are baked into the project
design as given in the WP description in Table 3.1b.

                                                              References

(1) IEA. Solar PV; Paris, 2022.
(2) European Commission. EU Solar Energy Strategy; Brussels, 2022.
(3) Cromratie C. et al. Life Cycle Assessment of a FPV and Feasibility for Application in Thailand. Renewable Energy 2021, 168, 448.
(4) Jordan, D. C. et al. Photovoltaics Module Reliability for the Terawatt Age. Prog. Energy 2022, 4 (2), 022002.
(5) Aarseth et al. Detecting Permanently Activated Bypass Diodes in Utility-Scale PV Plant Data. IEEE J. Photovoltaics 2022, 12, 1230.
(6) Assmus, M. et al. Measurement and Simulation of Vibrations of PV-Modules Induced by Dynamic Mechanical Loads: Measurement

        and Simulation of Vibrations of PV-Modules. Prog. Photovolt: Res. Appl. 2011, 19 (6), 688ş94.
(7) Koehl, M. et al. Categorization of Weathering Stresses for Photovoltaic Modules. Energy Sci Eng 2018, 6 (2), 93ş111.
(8) Thiagarajan. Development of Mission Profiles for Humidity Models in the Reliability Testing of PV Inverters. Proc. EUPVSEC 2021.
(9) Springer, M. et al. Future-proofing PV Module Reliability through a Unifying Predictive Modeling Framework.
(10) Nygaard, T. A. et al. Development, Verification and Validation of 3DFloat. Energy Procedia 2016, 94, 425ş33.
(11) Liu, L. et al. Power Generation Efficiency and Prospects of Floating Photovoltaic Systems. Energy Procedia 2017, 105, 1136ş42.
(12) Oliveira-Pinto, S.; Stokkermans, J. Assessment of the Potential of Different Floating Solar Technologies ş Overview and Analysis of

        Different Case Studies. Energy Conversion and Management 2020, 211, 112747.
(13) World Bank Group et al. Where Sun Meets Water: Floating Solar Market Report; Washington, D.C., 2019.
(14) Liu et al. Field Experience and Performance Analysis of FPV Technologies in the Tropics. Prog Photovolt Res Appl 2018, 26, 957.
(15) Kumar, M. et al. Challenges and Opportunities towards the Development of Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 2021, 233, 111408.
(16) DNV. DNV-RP-0584. Design, Development and Operation of Floating Solar Photovoltaic Systems, 2021.
(17) D÷renkńmper, M. et al. Influence of Wave Induced Movements on the Performance of Floating PV Systems. 36th European

        Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition; 1759-1762 2019, 4 pages, 4896 kb.
(18) Kumar et al. Impact of Water Waves on the Output Power of Floating PV Systems on Water Bodies, 2022.
(19) Skomedal, A. et al. Endogenous Soiling Rate Determination and Detection of Cleaning Events. IEEE J. Photovoltaics 2019, 9 (3).
(20) Nygard, M. M. et al. Combined Degradation and Soiling With Validation Against Independent Soiling Station Measurements. IEEE J.

        Photovoltaics 2023, 13 (2), 296ş304.
(21) IEA. Understanding Gender Gaps in Wages, Employment and Career Trajectories in the Energy Sector; 2022.
(22) IRENA. Solar PV: A Gender Perspective, 2022.
(23) Pouran, H. M. et al. Environmental and Technical Impacts of as an Emerging Clean Energy Technology. iScience 2022, 25 (11
(24) Essak, L.; Ghosh, A. Floating Photovoltaics: A Review. Clean Technol. 2022, 4 (3), 752ş69.
(25) Transparency Market Research. Floating Solar Panels Market; 2022.
(26) DOE. Market Research Study Floating Solar Photovoltaics; Rochester, NY, USA, 2022.
(27) Micheli, L. Energy and Economic Assessment of in Spanish Reservoirs Solar Energy 2021, 227, 625ş34.
(28) Ramasamy, V.; Margolis, R. Floating Photovoltaic System Cost Benchmark. NREL/TP-7A40-80695, 1828287, MainId:77479.
(29) InterSolar Europe. Trend Paper for Intersolar Europe: Floating Photovoltaics; Munich, Germany, 2022.

                                                            Part B - Page 45 of 45
