MS # number

Forming limit parameter space of a deep-drawn photovoltaic
aluminum structure
TVEIT Sigbjørn1,a*, REYES Aase 1,b and ERDURAN Emrah 1,c
1

Department of Built Environment, Oslo Metropolitan University, Postboks 4, St. Olavs plass, NO-0130
Oslo, Norway
a

sigbjorn.tveit@oslomet.no, baase.reyes@oslomet.no, cemrah.erduran@oslomet.no (*corresponding
author)

Keywords: Aluminum alloys, Anisotropy, Deep-drawing, Forming limits.
Background.
In the competitive race towards developing the
next renewable energy production method, the
floating solar company Sunlit Sea AS has
designed an innovative solution where formed
aluminum alloy sheet structures are used as
supports for floating photovoltaic (FPV) panels.
In addition to providing a rigid support, the choice
of material represents a key attribute of the
design: As the power output of FPV modules
decreases with operational temperature, the
highly conductive aluminum body, which acts as
a thermal bridge between the FPV module and the
cool sea water, allows the units to operate with
increased efficiency.
For the technology to reach its potential with
respect to cost per energy output, the structural
geometry must be optimized with respect to
several parameters, including heat transfer, and
material costs. An absolute constraint of this
optimization process is that the 1.5 mm thick
AA5083-H111 sheets remain intact during
forming of the structure’s elliptical cups. Hence,
in this study, we explore the limits of various
geometric design-parameters on the forming
limits, with a special dedication to the material’s
anisotropic plasticity characteristics.
Procedure
A finite element (FE) model is established to
simulate the deep-drawing process in LS-DYNA.

The geometry of the forming tools is
parametrized, and modeled as rigid parts, while
the deformable blank is equipped with a nonquadratic anisotropic yield criterion [1], a sixparameter Voce hardening law [2], and a nonlocal plastic instability criterion [3].
The direction of the major principal elliptic
axis to the to the principal direction anisotropy is
taken as a design parameter, in addition to those
related to the geometry.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1 – (a) First generation of Sunlit Sea’s FPV
design and (b) FE deep-drawing model
Key findings
The objective of the upcoming numerical study is
to:
•

Obtain a forming limit parameter space
that can be used as a constraint for
optimization procedures on the PV
structure, and

•

Determine the optimal angle between the
principal directions of the elliptic
geometry, and the anisotropic material.

References
[1] H. Aretz, A non-quadratic plane stress yield function for orthotropic sheet metals, J. Mater. Process.
Tech 168 (2005) 1-9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmatprotec.2004.10.008
[2] E. Voce, The relationship between stress and strain for homogeneous deformation, J. Inst. Met. 74
(1948) 537-562.
[3] T. Berstad, O.-G. Lademo, K. Pedersen, O. Hopperstad, Formability modeling with LS-DYNA, 8th
Int. LS-DYNA Users Conf. (2004)

ESAFORM 2024, Toulouse (France)

