The 8th European Congress on Computational Methods in Applied Sciences and Engineering
ECCOMAS Congress 2022
5 – 9 June 2022, Oslo, Norway

FORMING EFFECTS ON HIGH-CYCLE FATIGUE IN AN ALUMINUM
SHEET STRUCTURE USING THE OTTOSEN-STENSTRÖMRISTINMAA MODEL
SIGBJØRN TVEIT, AASE REYES AND EMRAH ERDURAN
Department of Built Environment
Oslo Metropolitan University
Post box 4, St. Olavs plass, NO-0130 Oslo, Norway
e-mail: sigbjorn.tveit@oslomet.no, aase.reyes@oslomet.no, emrah.erduran@oslomet.no
www.oslomet.no

Key words: Metal Sheet Forming, High-Cycle Fatigue, Aluminum, Finite Element Analysis.
Abstract. In this paper a multi-stage numerical analysis is presented with the aim to
investigate effects of forming on the high-cycle fatigue performance of a deep-drawn aluminum
sheet structure for use in a floating photovoltaic system. Forming simulations of a subsection
of the full geometry are performed in a realistic two-step drawing-springback cycle. A
simplified global analysis of service load response is performed to obtain displacements at the
submodel boundary, that are used to generate boundary conditions for a local service load
analysis. The local analysis is then performed on three different models of the subsection: (I)
excluding forming effects, (II) including effects of thinning, and (III) including effects of
thinning and residual stresses. The critical location with respect to the fatigue limit criterion in
the Ottosen-Stenström-Ristinmaa high-cycle fatigue model was identified for case (I), and this
location was used to compare the different models to assess effects of forming on high-cycle
fatigue performance. Furthermore, the dynamic friction coefficient 𝑓 , and the isotropickinematic mixing coefficient Β were varied in order to investigate their respective effects.
1 INTRODUCTION
For solar power to significantly contribute to covering the global energy demand, vast areas
dedicated to production are required. Furthermore, to reduce stress on existing power grids and
infrastructure, production locations should be placed as close as possible to the areas of
consumption. However, in densely populated districts where energy consumption is large, such
zones are often prioritized for agricultural purposes, etc. With the rapidly increasing global
demand for non-fossil and sustainable energy, technological, innovative and scalable solutions
to utilize renewable resources such as solar energy, are currently subject to extensive research.
Utilizing previously unused area for power production, the global potential of floating
photovoltaic (FPV) power has with conservative assumptions been estimated to 400 GW, which
equals the capacity of the 2017 cumulated installed solar energy plants [1]. While FPV has been
mostly restricted to the tranquil environments of freshwater reservoirs such as lakes and dams,
near-shore ocean territories are now gaining attention as potential sites for marine floating solar
power generation. With 70% of the world's major cities situated in the immediate vicinity to

Sigbjørn Tveit, Aase Reyes and Emrah Erduran.

the sea or other large bodies of water, technology that enables solar power production in such
locations allows the possibility of drastically scaling up production capacity.
A challenge with expanding the attention to also include in-shore marine environments is
the increased service loads associated with the wave loads. As floating structures are typically
subject to a high number of stress cycles from wave loads, the repeated loads might cause highcycle fatigue (HCF) failure at stress ranges far below the material’s static capacity.
Furthermore, high-cycle fatigue in metals is known to depend on certain superimposed mean
stress configurations.
During forming, the ductile aluminum undergoes large plastic and small elastic
deformations. While the plastic strains are permanent, the elastic strains are reversed upon
release of the drawing tools. This yields a configuration at equilibrium where some elastic
strains are internally constrained from returning to the stress-free state [2], producing a state of
residual stress.
The importance of incorporating effects from manufacturing in such analysis was
emphasized by Hariharan and Prakash [3], in their review article on challenges integrating
effects of forming in fatigue life predictions.
Facchinetti et al. [4] investigated the effects of forming on the HCF performance of a pseudo
Mac-Pherson front axle. In the study, HCF computations by the Dang-Van approach [5] were
carried out considering different forming effects, including those from thinning, plastic strains
and residual stresses. By including all forming effects in the fatigue assessment, safety factors
were reduced by more than 15% compared to the idealized case. The plastic behavior of the
steel sheet was modelled using linear isotropic hardening, and so the Bauschinger effect [6],
and its influences on the residual stress levels, were not considered.
In this paper, a multi-stage numerical analysis is presented with the aim of investigating the
effects of forming on HCF in a formed aluminum sheet float component designed by the FPV
technology provider Sunlit Sea AS. Using a non-quadratic isotropic yield surface and an
associated isotropic-kinematic exponential hardening law, metal sheet forming analyses in LSDYNA are conducted to obtain predictions of thinning and residual stress fields in the
manufactured components. A simplified global analysis of the full structure’s service load
response is conducted to obtain boundary conditions for a local service load response analysis
of the formed sheet. From this, a constant amplitude load case that serves as a simplified
representation of service wave loads is assessed in the HCF framework proposed by Ottosen et
al. [7] in a MATLAB implemented forward Euler scheme for time integration of the model’s
history variables.
In addition to the effects of thinning and residual stresses from forming on HCF, the
influence of two forming parameters, namely the dynamic friction coefficient 𝑓 , and the
isotropic-kinematic mixing coefficient Β is further investigated.
2 FPV STRUCTURE
In the FPV plant, several floating units are connected in a large matrix that is held in position
by a mooring system. Each FPV unit is mounted directly on to a float, which consists of two
identical aluminum sheet components (cf. Fig. 1) that are welded together, back-to-back, with
sealed off edges to generate a buoyant pontoon. The components are produced in a two-stage
forming operation, where 1.5 mm thick rolled AA5083-H111 sheets are deep-drawn into

2

Sigbjørn Tveit, Aase Reyes and Emrah Erduran.

Figure 1: The red, green and blue coordinate axes respectively correspond to the 𝑥-, 𝑦- and 𝑧-axes of the global
coordinate system. The dashed rectangles indicate locations of connectors, and the darkened area displays the
submodel assessed in Section 6.2 and 6.3. The geometry was provided by Sunlit Sea AS.

a cupcake tray-like shape. Aside from providing a stable support in rough weather conditions,
the aluminum structure acts as a thermal bridge between the panels and the cool sea water,
increasing the efficiency of the PV cells.
In the multi-stage analyses presented in this paper, the global model (1880 x 1880 mm full
structure) and the local model (130 x 130 mm submodel) refer to the same global Cartesian
coordinate system displayed in Fig. 1.
3 PLASTICITY MODEL
In the current work, a mixed isotropic-kinematic hardening model that follows a power law
dependency on plastic strain is assumed:
(1)

𝜎 = 𝑘 𝜀̅ + 𝜀̅

Here, 𝜎 is the flow stress, 𝑘 is the strength coefficient, 𝜀̅ is the effective strain at the onset of
yield, 𝜀̅ is the effective plastic strain, and 𝑛 is the hardening exponent.
The plastic strain increment follows the associate flow rule, and the mixing coefficient 0 ≤
Β ≤ 1 defines the respective contributions to isotropic (Β = 0) and kinematic (Β = 1)
hardening. The kinematic backstress tensor 𝜶 describes the deviatoric center of the of the yield
locus. For the complete mathematical description of the mixed hardening model, cf. [8].
The yield criterion is defined according to the non-quadratic Hershey-Hosford formulation
[9,10], which may be written as function of the deviatoric stress tensor 𝒔 = 𝝈 − 𝐈 𝑡𝑟(𝝈)⁄3,
where 𝐈 is the identity tensor. Introducing a plastic backstress-modified deviatoric stress tensor,
𝒔 = 𝒔 − 𝜶, the Hershey-Hosford equation is written in principle components as
|𝑠̂ − 𝑠̂ | + |𝑠̂ − 𝑠̂ | + |𝑠̂ − 𝑠̂ |

= 2𝜎ℎℎ

(2)

where 𝑚 is the flow potential exponent, and 𝜎 is the Hershey-Hosford effective stress. For
𝑚 = 2 and 𝑚 = 4, the formulation reduces to the von Mises criterion, while for 𝑚 = 1 and
𝑚 = ∞ it reduces to the Tresca criterion. The appropriate value of this floating parameter may
be fitted to agree with experimental observations or crystal-plasticity based simulations,
although the conformity of 𝑚 = 8 for face-centered cubic (FCC) materials, such as aluminum,
is well established.

3

Sigbjørn Tveit, Aase Reyes and Emrah Erduran.

4 HIGH-CYCLE FATIGUE MODEL
The Ottosen-Stenström-Ristinmaa HCF model [7] introduces a continuous accumulative
damage function, whose evolution is dictated by the elastic stress history. Inspired by plasticity
theory, the model proposes an endurance surface in stress space that separates a safe domain,
where fatigue damage cannot evolve, from an unsafe domain where fatigue damage may
accumulate if the stress state is moving away from the endurance surface in the stress space.
The locus moves in the deviatoric stress space according to an endurance backstress tensor 𝛍,
which should not be confused with the plastic backstress tensor 𝜶 that dictates yield surface
translation due to kinematic plastic strain hardening. The endurance function 𝛽 defines the
endurance limit when 𝛽 = 0, and is expressed as
𝛽=

1
𝑆𝑜

(𝜎

(3)

+ 𝐴𝐼1 − 𝑆𝑜 )

where 𝐴 is a positive dimensionless parameter which describes hydrostatical dependency, 𝐼 =
𝑡𝑟(𝝈) is the first stress tensor invariant, and 𝑆 is the endurance limit for completely reversed
stress cycles (𝑅 = 𝜎 ⁄𝜎
= −1). Furthermore, 𝜎 is the endurance backstress-modified
von Mises effective stress, which may be expressed as
𝜎

=

3
(𝒔 − 𝛍): (𝒔 − 𝛍)
2

⁄

=

3
‖𝒔 − 𝛍‖
2

(4)

Here, 𝒔 is the deviatoric stress tensor, and the colon operator denotes the double dot product
𝑨: 𝑩 = 𝑡𝑟(𝑨𝑩 ). It follows from Eq. (3) and (4) that 𝛽 < 0 corresponds to stress states inside
the endurance locus, while 𝛽 = 0 represents stress states on its surface. Opposed to plasticity
theory, where the implicit function is restricted to values ≤ 0, the endurance function 𝛽 may
also take on values > 0, corresponding to stress states located outside the endurance locus in
stress space. It is worth noting that for cyclic proportional stress paths, the endurance backstress
eventually reaches a stable configuration that reduces Eq. (3) to the well-known fatigue limit
criterion of Sines [11].
In the OSR HCF model, both the endurance backstress μ, and the fatigue damage is assumed
to accumulate whenever the stress state is located outside the endurance locus (𝛽 > 0) and
moving away from it (𝑑𝛽 > 0). The backstress evolution equation is written on incremental
form as
𝑑𝛍 = 𝑑𝛽𝐶(𝒔 − 𝛍)

(5)

where 𝐶 is a positive and dimensionless material parameter. Furthermore, the damage scalar 𝐷
that exists in the continuous domain from 0 (virgin state) to 1 (fatigue failure), if assumed
independent of the current amount of damage, may be expressed on incremental form as
𝑑𝐷 = 𝑑𝛽𝐾𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝐿𝛽)

(6)

with the positive dimensionless material parameters 𝐾 and 𝐿, and with the restriction 𝑑𝐷 ≥ 0.
With this, the continuous-time model presented provides a unified formulation of fatigue
limits and damage accumulation for arbitrary stress histories, where the cycle-counting methods
used in conventional models are replaced by the integration of Eq. (5) and (6) though time.

4

Sigbjørn Tveit, Aase Reyes and Emrah Erduran.

5 MATERIAL
In this paper we have considered sheets of AA5083-H111 rolled to 1.5 mm thickness. The
alloy is commonly used for marine structures due to its high strength and good resistance to the
chemical environment of seawater. For rolled aluminum alloy sheets of a specific alloy and
temper, properties of the as-delivered products may vary depending on several factors in the
production process, including exact chemical composition and amount of work hardening.
When performing simulations with the aim to make accurate predictions, it is preferable to use
experimental data from tests on the specific supplied product when calibrating model
parameters. However, in this preliminary study, model parameters were fitted to data reported
in the literature for equivalent or similar materials, and summarized in Table 1.
The hardening coefficients for AA5083-H111 were obtained from the uniaxial tensile test
results by Janbakhsh et al. [12], cf. Fig. 2(a). In the experimental study, data presented for 1
mm thick dog-bone specimens oriented parallel to the sheet’s rolling direction was used to fit
the exponential hardening law presented in Eq. (1).
For parameter calibration of the OSR model, HCF data of AA5083-H11 presented by
Sidhom et al. [13] was used. In the study, a four-point bending test was performed on 10 mm
thick rectangular plates (60 x 300 mm) at two different stress ratios, 𝑅 = 0.1 and 𝑅 = 0.5. The
graphical S-N data (stress amplitude 𝜎 vs. number of cycles at failure 𝑁 ) was digitized and
used along with the 50% probable nominal fatigue limits taken at 2×106 cycles, as presented in
the article. Parameter 𝐴 was calculated directly from the nominal fatigue limits of 142 MPa
(𝑅 = 0.1) and 112 MPa (𝑅 = 0.5) and was further used to obtain 𝑆 by extrapolation to the
zero mean stress state. S-N data for 𝑅 = 0.1 at equal stress levels was averaged to create three
distinct datapoints for calibration of the remaining parameters 𝐶, 𝐾 and 𝐿, where the error
function proposed by Ottosen et al. [7] was minimized using a genetic algorithm optimization
method in MATLAB. Fig. 2(b) displays the experimental S-N data as presented by Sidhom et
al. [13], along with the averaged quantities used for calibration, and the predicted S-N curves
for 𝑅 = 0.1 and 0.5. Note that the predicted curve for 𝑅 = 0.5 displays fair agreement with the
corresponding datapoints, although they were not used in the parameter fitting.

(b)

(a)

Figure 2: (a) The fitted power law hardening curve and stress-strain data from UT test specimens oriented
longitudinal to the sheet’s rolling direction, reproduced from [12]. (b) S-N diagram displaying the parameter fit
for AA5083-H11. The data presented in [13] includes the scattered datapoints (stars and crosses), and the 50%
probable nominal fatigue limits at 𝑅 = 0.1 (upper) and 𝑅 = 0.5 (lower) represented by arrowed squares. The
squares represent the averaged 𝑅 = 0.1 datapoints used in the numerical calibration of 𝐶, 𝐾 and 𝐿.

5

Sigbjørn Tveit, Aase Reyes and Emrah Erduran.

Table 1: Model parameters for AA5083

𝐸 [MPa]
72000
𝑘 [MPa]
517.3
𝐴
0.185

Elastic/mechanical
properties [14]
Plasticity parameters
(based on [12])
OSR parameters
(based on [13])

𝜈
0.33
𝜀̅ [%]
0.258
𝑆 [MPa]
174

𝜌 [kg/m3]
2650
𝑛
0.221
𝐶
2.72×105

𝑚
8
𝐾
0.726

𝐿
3.55×10–2

6 NUMERICAL ANALYSIS
6.1 Forming simulation
An attempt was made to realistically simulate the evolution of deformations, stresses, and
strains during the forming in manufacturing, by use of the commercial finite element (FE)
analysis software LS-DYNA. The process was simulated in four consecutive steps: 1a) drawing
of small cups, 1b) first springback, 2a) drawing of large cups, and 2b) second springback (cf.
Table 2). We took advantage of the repeated geometry by modeling a 130 x 130 mm submodel
of the full structure. The top and bottom surface of the 3D design geometry was used to generate
tool parts for the two drawing steps (cf. Fig. 3(a). for assembly of FE parts).
Global symmetry constraints were applied to the four planes enclosing the submodel domain,
and a one-way surface-to-surface contact rule was defined to dictate interaction between the
tools and the blank. To provide satisfactory spatial discretization, an initially uniform mesh of
20 by 20 shell elements (thickness 1.5 mm) was equipped with a five-level h-refinement
criterion considering the total rotation relative to surrounding shells, with a threshold of five
degrees per level.
Table 2: Model specs of the forming simulation model

a) Drawing
Time integration
Punch travel [mm]
Duration [s]
Element type
Num. of elements (start)
Num. of elements (end)
b) Springback
Time integration
Element type
Num. of elements
*For Β = 0.25 and 𝑓 = 0.1

Stage 1 (small cup)

Stage 2 (large cup)

Explicit
5.0
1.0
Belytschko-Tsay shell, NIP = 7
Blank
Punch
Die
400
842
926
3496*

Explicit
38.5
2.0
Belytschko-Tsay shell, NIP = 7
Blank
Punch
Die
3496*
4918
4993
5728*

Implicit (static)
Full integration shell, NIP = 7
Blank
3496*

Implicit (static)
Full integration shell, NIP = 7
Blank
5728*

6

Sigbjørn Tveit, Aase Reyes and Emrah Erduran.

(a)

(b)

Figure 3: (a) Assembly of FE parts for the first (upper) and second (lower) drawing of the formability simulation.
The tools (grey) are modelled as rigid parts, while the blank (red) obeys the constitutive laws presented in 2.1. (b)
Effective stress histories throughout the different stages of the forming simulations in a critical location for fatigue
failure, cf. Section 6.3 and Fig. 4: 1a) Drawing of small cups (A-B), 1b) first springback (B-C), 2a) drawing of
large cups (C-D), and 2b) second springback (D-E). Curves representing Β = 0.25, 𝑓 = 0.1 and 0.2 coincide and
are indistinguishable.

An explicit central difference time-integration scheme was used to ensure robustness for the
highly non-linear drawing analyses, while springback was simulated in a static implicit
analysis. The explicit drawing steps employed reduced integration Belytschko-Tsay shell
elements, while the implicit steps were conducted with full integration shells (respectively
ELFORM 2 and 16 in LS-DYNA [15]), with seven through-thickness integration points (NIP).
With the aim to study their influence on HCF, forming simulations were carried out while
varying two presumably independent parameters: the dynamic coefficient of friction (𝑓 = 0.0,
0.1 and 0.2), and the isotropic-kinematic mixing coefficient (𝐵 = 0.00, 0.25 and 0.50). Fig.
3(b) displays von Mises effective stress histories for the five different parameter couples in a
critical location for fatigue failure (cf. Section 6.3).
6.2 Analysis of service load response
Based on the idealized design geometry, an FE model of the full structure was established
with 1.5 mm thick fully integrated shell elements. To limit computational time, the structure
was spatially discretized with a mesh that is coarse compared to the h-refinement adapted mesh
from the forming simulation. See Table 3 for further details.
In this preliminary study, the deformation mode of unconstrained tension in the global 𝑥direction was simulated. The load was applied as a prescribed displacement at the connector
locations on the sides parallel to the global 𝑦-direction, while the connectors on the sides
parallel to the 𝑥-direction were left unconstrained, cf. Fig. 4. The magnitude of the prescribed
displacement (2.5 mm) was chosen by limiting the maximum effective stress level below the
material’s initial yield stress limit 𝜎 , anywhere in the full structure.
From the global analysis model, in-plane displacements at the location of the submodel
boundary were stored and simplified, and later applied as boundary conditions in the local
analysis. The simplification involved calculating the length change of the submodel domain in
the 𝑥- and 𝑦-directions, as well as their respective average values, cf. Fig. 5(a) and (b).

7

Sigbjørn Tveit, Aase Reyes and Emrah Erduran.

Table 3: Model specs of global and local service load analysis models

a) Global service load model
Time integration
Element type
Num. of elements
Element size at critical radii
b) Local service load model
Time integration
Element type
Num. of elements
Element size at critical radii
*For 𝛽 = 0.25 and 𝑓 = 0.1

Implicit (static)
Full integration shell, NIP = 7
45 393 (221 in submodel region)
~ 5.0 mm
Implicit (static)
Full integration shell, NIP = 7
5728*
~ 0.4 mm

Global model
Local model

𝛥𝐿(𝑥, 𝑦)

𝛥𝐿(𝑥, 𝑦)

Figure 4: Boundary conditions of global and local analysis models. The orange arrow indicates the critical location
for analysis case (I) (cf. Section 6.3), and the coordinate system refers to the global origin, with the red, green and
blue axes respectively referring to the 𝑥-, 𝑦- and 𝑧-direction.

(a)

(b)

Figure 5: (a) Change of length of submodel in 𝑥 direction, and (b) change of length of submodel in 𝑦-direction,
during global tensile deformation in 𝑥-direction. The silhouettes indicate projections of the structure geometry to
abscissa entities.

The final configuration of the forming analysis described in Section 6.1 was used to generate
two versions of the submodel for the local service load response analysis: one that included
thinning due to forming, and one that did not – both disregarding residual stresses. The local
analyses were then conducted by applying the averaged elongation in 𝑥- direction and average
contraction in 𝑦- direction, while keeping the remaining symmetric boundary conditions from
the forming analysis.

8

Sigbjørn Tveit, Aase Reyes and Emrah Erduran.

6.3 Fatigue analysis
A forward Euler scheme for the explicit integration of history variables in the OSR model
was implemented in MATLAB. The program takes the stress tensor history in one material
point as input, and by expressing the variation of stress tensor components as harmonic
functions, storage of entire stress history data is avoided.
𝑅 = −1 harmonic fatigue loading stress histories were generated from the local analysis,
assuming tension-compression symmetry of the service loads response. To evaluate how
forming influences the fatigue resistance, three categories of harmonic stress histories were
generated: (I) excluding forming effects, (II) including effects of thinning, and (III) including
effects of thinning and residual stresses. While (I) and (II) were taken directly from the local
service load analysis results, (III) was obtained by superimposition of results from (II) and the
final stress configurations of the forming simulations.
The critical location in case (I) with respect to fatigue failure in the OSR/Sines framework
was located. For proportional stress histories without superimposed mean stress, the critical
location is identified by simple evaluation of the spatial extremal of the endurance function
value in the tensile and compressive states. It was in the present case identified on the top
surface of the structure, near the edge of the small cup, where the maximums of the effective
stress 𝜎 and the first stress tensor invariant 𝐼 coincided in the tensile state. The location was
used to make comparisons between the three cases, to evaluate the effects of forming on HCF
resistance. As the fatigue limit was not exceeded in any of the three cases, safety factors with
respect to the Sines fatigue limit criterion were found by determining the stress tensor amplitude
scale factors 𝑠 that caused fatigue damage accumulation until failure in each case.
To extend the comparison beyond cases that reduce to the Sines fatigue limit criterion, a
scale factor 𝑠 = 25 (larger than the highest critical scale factor in all cases, but still within the
regime of material linearity and high-cycle fatigue in the submodel domain), was applied to
calculate the number of cycles at failure under these conditions. In Table 4, critical scale factors,
and the number of cycles at failure for 𝑠 = 25 are displayed along with the mean values of the
first stress tensor invariant 𝐼 and shell thickness after forming, in the same location. Fig. 6(a)
and (b) displays the effective stress histories, and the accumulation of the fatigue damage 𝐷 at
the location used for comparison.

(a)

(b)

Figure 6: Results from critical location of case (I) (cf. Fig. 4). (a) Effective stress histories of fatigue analysis. (b)
Fatigue damage accumulation histories for stress tensor amplitude scale factors 𝑠 = 25. In both (a) and (b), curves
representing (III) Β = 0.25, 𝑓 = 0.1 and 0.2 coincide and are indistinguishable.

9

Sigbjørn Tveit, Aase Reyes and Emrah Erduran.

Table 4: Fatigue analysis results in reference point obtained from critical location (cf. Fig. 4.a) of case (I)

Cycles at
failure
𝑁,

Critical scale
factor
𝑠 ,
(I) No forming
(Β = 0.25, 𝑓 = 0.1)
(II) Thinning
(Β = 0.25, 𝑓 = 0.1)
(III) Thin. & residual stress
Β = 0.00, 𝑓 = 0.1
Β = 0.25, 𝑓 = 0.0
Β = 0.25, 𝑓 = 0.1
Β = 0.25, 𝑓 = 0.2
Β = 0.50, 𝑓 = 0.1

Mean first
invariant of 𝝈
𝐼 , [MPa]

Shell
thickness
𝑡 [mm]

17.699

199 475

0.00

1.500

17.461

189 592

0.00

1.378

13.832
15.359
15.241
15.241
17.345

94 271
124 847
122 723
122 723
183 236

200.5
112.9
119.8
119.8
-2.070

1.375
1.378
1.378
1.378
1.381

7 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUDING REMARKS
In this paper, a multi-stage numerical analysis was performed with the aim to investigate
effects of forming on HCF performance of a deep-drawn aluminum sheet structure for use in a
FPV plant.
The current study focuses on the assessment of a symmetric submodel in the periodic
geometry, located near the center of the float component. A simulation of the forming process
was performed in a realistic two-step drawing springback cycle. A simplified global analysis of
the full structure’s service load response was carried out, and the displacements at the submodel
boundary were used to generate boundary conditions for a local service load response analysis.
By superposition of results from the forming simulation and the local service load analysis,
three different stress histories were obtained for analysis of HCF: (I) Excluding forming effects,
(II) Including effects of thinning, and (III) Including effects of thinning and residual stress. The
critical location with respect to the fatigue limit criterion used in the OSR/Sines model was
identified for case (I), and this location was used to compare the different models in order to
assess the effects of forming on HCF performance. Furthermore, two parameters, namely the
dynamic friction coefficient 𝑓 , and the isotropic-kinematic mixing coefficient Β were varied
in order to further investigate their respective effects.
The HCF capacity in the assessed location was distinctly influenced by the forming effects,
although the fatigue limit criterion was not exceeded in any of the assessed cases. Relative to
the model that excluded forming effects, the critical amplitude scale factor 𝑠 , for the
OSR/Sines fatigue limit criterion was reduced with 22% in the most severe case. When
employing a constant amplitude scale factor 𝑠 = 25 that exceeded the fatigue limit in all cases,
the number of cycles at failure 𝑁 , in the most severe case was reduced to less than half of the
reference model that excluded forming effects.
Although the thickness reduction in the assessed location was never less than 8% for any of
the parameter couples, 𝑠 , and 𝑁 , were only reduced respectively by 1% and 5%, when the
thinning effect alone was included.
The dynamic friction coefficient 𝑓 had negligible influence on the results in both forming

10

Sigbjørn Tveit, Aase Reyes and Emrah Erduran.

and fatigue in this study. The residual stress and thinning after forming for 𝑓 = 0.1 and 𝑓 =
0.2 (at Β = 0.25) were indistinguishable in the location where the fatigue analysis was
conducted, and thus the presented results are identical for the two cases.
From a qualitative evaluation of the forming simulation results, the magnitude of predicted
residual hydrostatic pressure at the surfaces of the formed component was generally dependent
on the isotropic-kinematic mixing coefficient Β. In the location subject to fatigue analysis, the
residual component of 𝐼 was reduced from 200.5 MPa at Β = 0.0 (fully isotropic) to -2.070
MPa at Β = 0.5. With the OSR fatigue model employing an endurance function with linear
dependency on 𝐼 , the present model predicts that this dependency also applies to HCF.
The results presented in this paper further emphasize the importance of considering effects
of residual stresses when assessing HCF performance of formed structures. Further research on
this topic could include validation of sophisticated models to predict distributions and
magnitudes of residual stresses in formed components, with emphasis on the isotropickinematic hardening formulation.
Several simplifications were made in this preliminary study, and the presented work has
several limitations, including but not limited to the following:
-

Only one region of the structural component was assessed.
The load history was significantly simplified.
A simplified method to transfer loads from the global to local model was used.
Effects of stress gradients, surface roughness, welding and plastic anisotropy were
neglected.
Data reported in the literature for similar but not equivalent materials to the one used in
the real structure was used to calibrate material models.

REFERENCES
[1] World Bank Group Where sun meets water : Floating solar market report - executive

summary (english), (2018).
[2] Marciniak, Z., Duncan, J.L., and Hu, S.J. Mechanics of sheet metal forming. Butterworth-

Heinemann, (2002).
[3] Hariharan, K. and Prakash, R.V. Integrating effect of forming in fatigue life prediction:

[4]

[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]

Review of present scenario and challenges. Pros. Inst. Mech. Eng. B: J. Eng. Manfc (2012)
226: 967-979.
Facchinetti, M.L., Weber, B., Doudard, C., and Calloch, S. Taking into account the forming
process in fatigue design computations. Fatigue Design 2007: Recueil des Conferences
Proceedings (2008).
Dang-Van, K. Macro-micro approach in high-cycle multiaxial fatigue. ASTM
International, (1993).
Vormwald, M. Fatigue of constructional steel s460 under complex cyclic stress and strain
sequences. Proc. Engng (2011) 10: 270-275.
Ottosen, N.S., Stenstrom, R., and Ristinmaa, M. Continuum approach to high-cycle fatigue
modeling. Int. J. Fatg (2008) 30: 996-1006.
Livermore Software Technology Ls-dyna® theory manual. (2019).
Hershey, A.V. The elasticity of an isotropic aggregate of anisotropic cubic crystals. J. App.
Mec. (1954) 21: 236-240.

11

Sigbjørn Tveit, Aase Reyes and Emrah Erduran.

[10] Hosford, W.F. A generalized isotropic yield criterion. J. App. Mec. (1972) 39: 607-609.
[11] Sines, G. Failure of materials under combined repeated stresses with superimposed static

stresses. University of California at Los Angeles (1955).
[12] Janbakhsh, M., Djavanroodi, F., and Riahi, M. Utilization of bulge and uniaxial tensile

tests for determination of flow stress curves of selected anisotropic alloys. Proc. Inst. Mec.
Eng. L: J Mat.: Desg. Applictn (2013) 227: 38-51.
[13] Sidhom, N., Laamouri, A., Fathallah, R., Braham, C., and Lieurade, H.P. Fatigue strength
improvement of 5083 H11 Al-alloy I-welded joints by shot peening: Experimental
characterization and predictive approach. Int. J. Fat. (2005) 27: 729-745.
[14] AZoNetwork Aluminium alloys - aluminium 5083 properties, fabrication and applications.
(2005) www.azom.com/article.aspx?ArticleID=2804 (Accessed July 8th, 2022).
[15] Livermore Software Technology Ls-dyna® keyword user's manual. Vol. I, (2020).
[16] Lee, J., Park, S.-Y., and Choi, B.-H. Evaluation of fatigue characteristics of aluminum
alloys and mechanical components using extreme value statistics and C-specimens. Metals
(2021) 11: 1915-1926.

12

